can you write an answer that expresses that I 
1 - am a filippino american and wish to serve my country
	- believe that this country is the best in the world, and that it should remain despite the threat of other nations and global organizations
	- am a narrative, creative, curious, and analytic person at heart who thrives in isolation yet has learned to adapt and manipulate my position in social situations
	- I have been conducting my own open source research in narrative studies and the decline of United States' control of its own cultural freedom.
	- The decline and pandering of media towards profits rather than media created for americans that is honest and self reflective
	- I believe that it is possible to revitalize and recapture the cultural dominance that the USA has held since the 50s 
	- I believe that data is the future when it comes to narrative storytelling and the reaching the heart of the american people to build a robust solid culture of reintergration, confidence, and pride
	- I am not a STEM major, but I graduated with a humanities degree.
	- I went to culinary school, and found myself having to operate in a world of regimented demands and psychological isolation amongst peers
	- Above all I believe I am a righteous person at heart but believe that the American Spirit is an ideal that must be upheld and proven by those who have the privilidge to wield it. 
	
	I also believe in the dualistic principles of probability/possiblity especially in applying to an organisation such as CIA.
	
	Answer the following question with the information provided below in 5000 words or less in regards to the CIA application
	'Please tell us about a time when you had to “think on your feet” and describe a separate situation when you had to keep a level head while under pressure. What were each of those situations and how did you handle them? *
	
	When I was a lighting technician for a musical in my local community theatre
	our opening night was a full house.
	I was in the ligthing booth which sits behind the audience 'house section' of the theatre running the lights
	At the end of a musical segment, the curtains became caught on one of the ligting trees. 
	The individuals who worked backstage, stage hands, were volunteer individuals who are required to perform certain duties and not necessarily solve problems
	The unfortunate matter at hand was the danger of the light trees which weigh up to 200 lbs in which the curtains were stuck on was the primary concern, safety for to be brief.
	The risk of a mortal casualty rose as I saw multiple stage hands simply tugging on the curtain line forcing the supporting arbor fly bar to flex and disrupt structural integrity.
	Now, I'm a professional. The show itself was already fraying at the edges but I beliveved there was an elegant solution to the matter that didn't involve me running like an idiot through the house and up the stage.
	Instead, I recalled that there was a trapped door on behind me on the second floor that if I could fengle open, I could get back stage without causing a panic. 
	Once I got back stage, I had the second problem of stopping the stage hands from making the problem worse, assessing the damage, and finding a solution to close the curtians 
	To maintain deocurm and prevent a panic, I did not use words and simply used my hands to calmly stop the stage hands from yanking the cord. 
	To assess the damage I took the stage manager's red-gelled flash light to examine the C-clamp couplings and safety lines. 
	The safety lines were intact, and knowing that each of the steel wires are rated to hold 1-ton each, I knew we were okay. 
	I was able to eliminate other possibilities of safety concerns such as the chains anchord to the ceiling due to my experience. 
	The final superficial and perhaps most important issue was to renable the curtain to close. 
	A ladder would take too long to assemble and be to loud. I recalled seeing a aquatic pool cleaning stick somewhere in the workshop. 
	I was able to use fine motor-skills under pressure to pop that curtain off the lighting tree back into working condition. 
	
	Working for Culinary at Disney World was one of the greatest learning experiences I had. 
	The demand for excellence under pressure is relentless unlike anything I have ever experienced before. 
	My favorite position that I had was being a the chef at the Top of the World Lounge. 
	It is a solo position which I am responsible for the opening, prep, closing, and managenment of the weight staff and bartender to a certain degree.
	I volunteered for the position as much as I could. I am one who creates my own pressure to perform and have noticed weakness under direct vigilent supervision.
	I believe these two questions are similar yet slightly nuanced in a way. 
	Both situations reveal my personality to be responsible with goal-oriented results driven missions. 
	I believe on both situations I thrive when I have the support of a superior that I can trust to have all the resources I need to accomplish a goal. 
	I have confidence when it comes to leading others only when I know absolutely everything that has to do with a task. 
	Something I can do myself but understand that teams can do wonders for efficiency. 
	
	
	I like to think in dualities. In my life as a filippino-american growing up in the south, I often found myself as someone that stuck out without any recourse.
	I found was to revert that. To blend in, and perhaps be the most normal person there is. What is the solution to being the red ant amongst black ones? Lean to it. 
	I took this principal into all of my work in academia, and my own perosnal studies. There is the pervailing thought and then there is the counter to that thought. 
	Its a pattern of thinking that I believe is prevelant also in human history. There is the status-quo, the counter, and the return. 
	To function in society you must find a way to either be the sattus-quo, legitimately challange it, or have the knowledge to fill the vaccum, which often leads to the former. 
	In academics I've studied a lot of literature in regareds to theory and critcism, how different perspectives, influences, historical backgroud, philosophy, etc. can manipulate the interpretation of an outcome. 
	In that way, I've never thought of myself as having my own personal deep seeded beliefs which I cultivate myself, but more as a product of my upbringing as a first generation immigrant American. 
	In today's current western media zeitgeist, the powers that be emphasize grand narratives of hate and violence based on identity and assumtions of identity. 
	A grand manipulation of truth, lies, and eternal apocalypse akin to the that of the old testament. 
	I believe this is all a simple product of a foreign adversary manipulating the one weakness of the American Way of Life.
	That being a culture driven, not on principles of virtue and freedom but of greed and excess. 
	There will always be a duality of the culture and counter-culture within the american media. 
	It is simply a choice of which duality suits the country best for its future. 
	In my opinion, what matters is the freedom of Americans to make that choice sans the clandestine objectives of competing countries or entities who are determined to dismantle Americanism at every point of weakenss that is not our armed forces.
	
	At the height of my previous dream of becoming a filmmaker, I started a kickstarter to fund a film that I had worked the better part of 5 years writing. 
	I put all my effort into it. Pooled all the resrouces I could, used every bit of knowledge I had to create this campaign.
	It flopped beyond my wildest imaginations. Not even $5,000 raised out of $150k requested.
	I believe the darkest emotions I felt stemmed from the feelings of shame, stupidity, naivety, and dissapointing those who I had promised and let down. 
	The greatest thing I learned and thus with every failure beyond that time nearly 10 years ago is to have a system to process the grief and then proceed. 
	I am a fan of the OODA loop personally. 