10. Figures and tropes
It’s not for nothing that some still call Elvis Presley ‘The King’ and Eric
Clapton ‘God’. But the force of these acts of renaming depends on the
assumption that no one takes them literally. We take it that no one ever sup-
posed that the United States had become a monarchy and put Elvis Presley on
the throne. No one, not even the most loyal of fans, even in his heyday, believed
that Eric Clapton created the world in six days and rested on the seventh.
They may have believed that his guitar-playing was transplendent, but even
those whose judgement was blurred by an unholy mixture of illegal substances
and Clapton’s heavenly guitar solos are unlikely to have taken him for the
Almighty Himself. These renamings of Presley and Clapton, then, involve the
kind of exaggeration or verbal extravagance known as hyperbole. By the same
token, few are likely to take as gospel the theologically unorthodox if slightly
more credible statement in Pink’s 2004 hit single, that ‘God is a DJ’ (‘If God is
a DJ / Life is a dance floor / Love is the rhythm / You are the music’). To refer
to Elvis as ‘The King’ or Clapton as ‘God’, or to talk in turn about God as a DJ,
is to use figurative language.
Literary language is sometimes thought about in terms of its deviations
from or distortions of ordinary language. Like many generalizations, this idea
is both useful and misleading. It suggests that literary texts are characterized
by the use of figures of speech or tropes, conceiving these as basically synony-
mous – in other words, as deviations from ‘ordinary’ or ‘literal’ language. Thus
Chambers Dictionary defines a rhetorical figure as ‘a deviation from the
ordinary mode of expression’, and trope as ‘a figure of speech, properly one in
which a word or expression is used in other than its literal sense’. Such figures
include, for example, hyperbole, metaphor, metonymy and anthropomor-
phism. Metaphor is the general term for the figure of resemblance, wherebyFigures and tropes 81
one thing is likened to another. Metonymy is a general term for the figure
of association or contiguity, whereby one thing is talked about by referring
to something associated with it. Anthropomorphism is the general term used
to refer to the non-human as if it were human. So-called ‘ordinary’ language,
by contrast, is thought to use far more literal language, language that calls a
spade a spade.
As the examples of Presley, Clapton and Pink suggest, however, the figura-
tive is by no means restricted to literary texts: rather, it saturates all language.
Friedrich Nietzsche famously argued that even truth itself is figurative. In his
essay ‘On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense’ (1873), Nietzsche asks
‘What, then, is truth?’ and offers the following answer:
A mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms – in
short, a sum of human relations, which have been enhanced, transposed,
and embellished poetically and rhetorically, and which after long use seem
firm, canonical, and obligatory to a people: truths are illusions about which
one has forgotten that this is what they are; metaphors which are worn out
and without sensuous power; coins which have lost their pictures and now
matter only as metal, no longer as coins. (Nietzsche 1980, 46–7)
When we think that we speak ‘truthfully’, without the distortions of figuration,
Nietzsche suggests, we only deceive ourselves. The language of truth, lan-
guage supposedly purified of figures and tropes, is simply language to which
we have become so habituated that we no longer recognize it as figurative.
This suggests that our world is constituted figuratively, that we relate to our-
selves, to other people, to the world, through figures of speech. The mani-
pulation and exploitation of figurative language may therefore be understood
to have fundamental implications for the political, social, even economic
constitution of our world. The very way that we understand the world may be
said to be mediated by the kinds of figures that we use to speak about it. We
could think about this in terms of any everyday aspect (aspect is a visual
metaphor) of life – for example, the names of newspapers, those ‘organs’ (a
metaphor) that help to organize(the same organic metaphor) our world: the
Herald, Guardian, Sun, Mirror, Telegraph, Tribuneand so on. While such
discourses as history, philosophy, psychology, economics and so on may,
at least in principle, attempt to rid themselves of figurative language, it is pre-
cisely figuration which is, unavoidably, at the heart of the discipline of literary
studies. This unavoidability is suggested in the passage from Nietzsche, with
its concluding figuration of metaphors as coins. Nietzsche explicitly relies on
the figurative to demystify language and thus to formulate a definition of the
truth. As Paul de Man remarks, tropes are not ‘a derived, marginal, or aberrant82 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
form of language but the linguistic paradigm par excellence’: figurative
language ‘characterizes language as such’ (de Man 1979, 105).
Central to literary criticism and theory, then, are such questions as: What
are the effects of rhetorical figures in literary texts? What purpose do they
serve? And how do they function? One of the most common misconceptions
about literary texts is that their figurative language is simply decorative, some-
thing added to the text to make it more readable, more dramatic, or more
‘colourful’. It is certainly true that the perceived presence of figurative lan-
guage often seems to increase at points of emotional and dramatic intensity,
like the soaring violins at moments of sexual passion or dramatic tension
in a Hollywood film. Thus D.H. Lawrence, for example, is known for his
so-called ‘purple passages’. But simply to suggest that figures are ‘added’ to
literary language, like the musical soundtrack to a movie, does not get us very
far. The soaring violin theory of rhetorical figures is misguided because, as
Nietzsche suggests, language is inescapably figurative: the meaning of a text
cannot be separated from its expression, its figures.
Figuration is fundamental to our world, to our lives. An alteration in the
way we figure the world also involves an alteration in the way that the world
works. Take Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man(1952), for example. This novel
uses invisibility as a figure (both metaphorical and literal) for the marginality,
the oppression, effacement and dehumanization of black people in the United
States. Here is the opening to the prologue to Ellison’s great novel:
I am an invisible man. No, I am not a spook like those who haunted Edgar
Allan Poe; nor am I one of your Hollywood-movie ectoplasms. I am a man
of substance, of flesh and bone, fiber and liquids – and I might even be said
to possess a mind. I am invisible, understand, simply because people refuse
to see me. Like the bodiless heads you see sometimes in circus sideshows,
it is as though I have been surrounded by mirrors and hard, distorting glass.
When they approach me they see only my surroundings, themselves,
or figments of their imagination – indeed, everything and anything except
me. (3)
Visibility and invisibility figure the social, political and economic effacement
and consequent oppression of blacks in the United States. The man is invisi-
ble because he cannot escape the preconceptions that others have concerning
him. These preconceptions are produced by a ‘perception’ of his skin colour.
This so-called perception is itself an effect of the kind of rhetorical figure we
call synecdoche, whereby a part – here, the skin – stands for the whole – a man.
But simply to categorize someone as ‘black’ (or ‘white’) is in a sense laughably
reductive and inaccurate. Likewise, to say that someone is ‘coloured’ is in aFigures and tropes 83
sense to say nothing at all, because the skin, hair, nails, eyes, teeth of each one
of us is a multichromatic assemblage of different hues. The categories of black,
white and coloured operate as instances of synecdoche. What people ‘see’ is a
form of metaphor, a figment or figure of imagination – a ‘phantom in other
people’s minds...a figure in a nightmare which the sleeper tries with all his
strength to destroy’ (3). It is in this way that Ellison’s narrator is invisible, for
while people think that they see – they think they see a black man – in fact
they see nothing, they are blinded by metaphor. Ellison’s novel suggests that
such habitual blindness may be challenged and in turn transformed by acts of
language. It presents a metaphor or allegory of the invisible man to counter
the worn coin of representation. After all, the effacement of the black man is, in
a crucial sense, constituted through acts of language. Without the vocabulary
of prejudice and racism, any such effacement would be inconceivable. Racism
is an effect of language. In particular, the passage from Ellison cited above
suggests that racism is an effect of synecdochic substitution – skin pigment for
personal identity, individual for collective or racial identity. The invisible man
can be seen again, his invisibility perceived, through alternative metaphors,
through rhetorical figures.
The opening of Ellison’s novel, then, gives us one answer to the question of
how figures and tropes function in literary and other texts: they can make us
see what is otherwise invisible, concealed by prejudice, effaced by habit. They
seek to change the world. To recall the term used by Viktor Shklovsky and
other Russian formalist critics writing in the 1920s, figurative language has the
capacity to ‘defamiliarize’ our world – to refigure, reform, revolutionize.
What kinds of effects can be produced through figuration and how far
can a reading of such figures go? Let us consider another example, a poem by
the nineteenth-century New England poet Emily Dickinson. In Dickinson’s
work, figures, like language considered more generally, tremble on the edge
of meaning. One reason why her poetry is particularly appropriate in a dis-
cussion of figurative language is that it characteristically ‘deconstructs’ or
defamiliarizes its own rhetorical figures: her poetry constitutes a subtle yet
decisive assault on figuration itself. This poem (no. 328) was written around
1862:
A Bird came down the Walk—
He did not know I saw—
He bit an Angleworm in halves
And ate the fellow, raw,
5 And then he drank a Dew
From a convenient Grass—84 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
And then hopped sidewise to the Wall
To let a Beetle pass—
He glanced with rapid eyes
10 That hurried all around—
They looked like frightened Beads, I thought—
He stirred his Velvet Head
Like one in danger, Cautious,
I offered him a Crumb
15 And he unrolled his feathers
And rowed him softer home—
Than Oars divide the Ocean,
Too silver for a seam—
Or Butterflies, off Banks of Noon
20 Leap, plashless as they swim.
In language at once direct and elusive, the poem describes a bird eating a
worm, taking a drink and flying away. The rhetorical figure which stands out
in the opening lines is personification or anthropomorphism. Both the bird
(‘he’) and the worm (the ‘fellow’) of the first stanza are described as if they were
human. But the anthropomorphic insistence of the first half of the poem
becomes strangely convoluted as it goes on to explore the specificity of simile
(a is like b) as a species of metaphor (a is b, in other words the ‘like’ is unstated).
In line 11 we learn that the bird’s eyes ‘looked like frightened Beads’. But this
simile is not as simple as it looks. It remains unclear whether ‘looked like’
means that the eyes actively looked(they looked, in the way that beads look,
assuming that they do), or whether the bird’s eyes, to the narrator, looked like
beads. The simile is itself ambiguous. Moreover, whatthe eyes looked like –
the beads – also undergoes an uncanny metamorphosis. To refer to beads as
‘frightened’ is to employ the rhetorical figure called animism, whereby an
inanimate object is given the attributes of life. Far from clarifying the look
of the bird’s eyes, the simile makes it lessconcrete, less visible or imaginable,
by making a comparison with something that cannot possibly be seen. It is
entirely incorrect to say that the bird’s eyes ‘looked like’ frightened beads,
since frightenedbeads are not available to the gaze at all, and beads cannot
look. The simile, a peculiar example of a ‘transferred epithet’, disturbs the
sense of who or what is frightened and confounds the distinction between the
figurative and the literal, image and word, the imagined and the visible.Figures and tropes 85
The last two stanzas of the poem increase these uncertainties. In the penul-
timate stanza, rowing on an ocean is the ‘vehicle’ for the metaphor, the ‘tenor’
or ‘meaning’ of which is flying. But once again the figure is ambiguous: the
ocean metaphor is inadequate, the line suggests, to express the softness, the
silvery delicacy of the movement of the bird’s flight. Where a boat would leave
a wake in the water, a kind of seam, the bird leaves none in the air. But while
‘Too silver for a seam’ may be ‘translated’ as meaning something like ‘too delic-
ate for a wake or track in water’, the line may also be understood to be referring
to the delicacy of figurative language and its relation to the world. Critics
usually distinguish simile within metaphor more generally by pointing out
that phrases such as ‘like’ or ‘as’ mark simile as explicitly figurative. Through
another kind of figure known as paronomasia – produced by the homophone
‘seam’/‘seem’ – the poem reflects silently on figuration itself. Metaphors seem
to be unmarked, too silver, too subtle, for a seam, or for the word ‘seem’ (or ‘as’
or ‘like’), too delicate for the mark of figuration. Just as there is no seam left
behind after the bird’s flight – it flies as if by magic – metaphor also leaves no
mark, no ‘seem’ and no seam. Or, to put it more paradoxically but more
accurately, like the word ‘plashless’, a word which negates ‘plash’ but does so
only by referring to it, metaphor both does and does not leave a mark.
The extraordinary ending to the poem involves another metaphor for the
bird’s flight – the flight of a butterfly – but presents this in terms of swimming.
The bird is like a butterfly leaping off a bank into the water so delicately that
there is no (s)plash. With the phrase ‘Banks of Noon’, however, Dickinson’s
poem disturbs the basis of metaphorical transformation itself. ‘Banks of
Noon’ is no more comprehensible than the ‘frightened Beads’ encountered
earlier. The metaphorical transitions are short-circuited, for while it is pos-
sible to see that a bird’s flight is ‘like’ rowing a boat, it is unclear how a bank of
noon can be ‘like’ anything physical – are we to believe that ‘noon’ can be a
kind of riverbank, for example? The phrase highlights the deceptiveness of
figuration, its potential for linguistic effects of trompe l’æiland hallucination.
It dramatizes the ease, the inevitability with which language slides away
from referential assumptions. On the other hand, ‘Banks of Noon’ can be con-
sidered in terms of another kind of phenomenon – intertextuality – whereby a
text is woven out of words and phrases from elsewhere. In this respect, the
phrase recalls the Shakespearean ‘bank and shoal of time’ from Macbeth’s mur-
derous speech (MacbethI.vii.6) – giving the sense of the present as a kind of
isthmus within the ocean of eternity – and suggests the end or the edge of time,
time strangely suspended or delayed. The ending of Dickinson’s poem suggests
that figurative language entails a series of displacements and substitutions
which both produce and withhold the illusion of reference. In these and other86 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
ways, Dickinson’s poem suggests that figures make and unmake our world,
give us meaning and take it away.
In our discussion of Dickinson’s poem, we have drawn attention to the self-
reflexive possibilities of figuration, to the way that figures can turn reflexively
back on themselves, trope themselves, so that the text remarks on its own lan-
guage. To end our discussion of figures, we shall turn briefly to another text
which may also be shown to register the uncanny potential of figurative lan-
guage. In our chapter on narrative we referred briefly to James Joyce’s great
long short story ‘The Dead’. The story begins with the following sentence:
‘Lily, the caretaker’s daughter, was literally run off her feet’ (199). In fact, Lily
is not literallyrun off her feet at all. Strangely, we say ‘literally run off her feet’
to mean notliterally but figuratively run off her feet. The use of the word ‘literal’
here, like the phrase about feet, is metaphorical. In this respect, we can see that
the opening sentence to the story produces a play of figuration which refers
indirectly both to the subject of the story, death, and to its telling. ‘Literally run
offher feet’ is a dead metaphor, a metaphor which has become so common that
its identity as figurative has largely been lost: dead metaphors are Nietzsche’s
worn coins of language. We can say ‘I was literally run off my feet’ without
recognizing that we are using a metaphor at all, that far from using the phrase
literally, we are exploiting a figure of speech. The metaphorical use of the word
‘literally’ in this phrase is a good example of the evocative possibilities of ‘cat-
achresis’, the rhetorical term for a misuse or abuse of language. ‘The Dead’,
which is above all about death, is also about dead language, dead metaphors.
Joyce’s story ends with the return of a ‘figure from the dead’ (251), the
haunting memory of Gretta’s dead boyfriend, Michael Furey. In the final
pages, Gretta’s husband Gabriel looks out of the window of a hotel as his wife
sleeps. The last paragraph of the story is couched in intense, swooning, highly
figurative prose:
A few light taps upon the pane made him turn to the window. It had begun
to snow again. He watched sleepily the flakes, silver and dark, falling
obliquely against the lamplight. The time had come for him to set out on
his journey westward. Yes, the newspapers were right: snow was general
all over Ireland. It was falling on every part of the dark central plain, on the
treeless hills, falling softly upon the Bog of Allen and, farther westward,
softly falling into the dark mutinous Shannon waves. It was falling, too,
upon every part of the lonely churchyard on the hill where Michael Furey
lay buried. It lay thickly drifted on the crooked crosses and headstones, on
the spears of the little grate, on the barren thorns. His soul swooned slowly
as he heard the snow falling faintly through the universe and faintly falling,
like the descent of their last end, upon all the living and the dead. (255–6)Figures and tropes 87
The most remarkable, the most pressing feature of this paragraph is, perhaps,
repetition. In particular, the word ‘falling’ occurs seven times: falling obli-
quely, falling, falling softly, softly falling, falling, falling faintly, faintly falling.
This verbal repetition produces a mesmeric sense of descent, sleep, fading
and death. What Joyce appears to be evoking here, through figurative effects
of language – repetition, alliteration, assonance and sibilance, syntactic inver-
sion or chiasmus (‘falling faintly, faintly falling’) – is a fading out, a falling off,
of language itself. ‘The Dead’ is about the death of (figurative and literal)
language.
To borrow Joyce’s metaphor and reverse it, it is indeed the metaphorical
death of language (rather than the death of metaphorical language) that gives
the story life. And it is, more generally, the productive tensions of figurative
language that give life to literary texts. In this chapter, we have tried to suggest
that, like literature itself, literary criticism begins and ends with figuration. In
reading we should try to figure out ways in which figures at once generate
and disturb literary texts. Like Marvell’s lover in his desire to stop the sun (see
Chapter 4), if we cannot escape figures, still we can make them run.
Further reading
Two good recent ‘introductions’ to the idea of metaphor from the perspective
of literature and literary theory in the one case and linguistics and stylistics in
the other, are David Punter, Metaphor (2008) and Murray Knowles and
Rosamund Moon, Introducing Metaphor(2006). For an engaging and inform-
ative further guide to figures and tropes, see Arthur Quinn’s little book
Figures of Speech(1993). See Paul Ricoeur’s The Rule of Metaphor(1978) for
a difficult but comprehensive work on metaphor from the perspective of a
philosopher. For a classic literary critical approach, see Brooke-Rose’s A
Grammar of Metaphor(1958). An influential structuralist account of figura-
tion or ‘poetic’ language is Roman Jakobson’s ‘Closing Statement: Linguistics
and Poetics’ (1960). Derrida’s ‘White Mythology’ (1982) is a dense and
difficult but by now classic argument against the notion that there could be any
simple escape from figurative language. Other useful books are Todorov,
Introduction to Poetics(1981) and Lakoff and Johnson, Metaphors We Live By
(1980). ‘Silva Rhetoricae’ is a very helpful website for figures of speech, at
http://humanities.byu.edu/rhetoric/silva.htm.