19. Moving pictures
What do movies tell us about literature? Over recent decades cinema has
increasingly come to be incorporated into university literature courses
and literature professors have been pronouncing on films, as well as on novels,
poems and plays. But what do we learn about literature when we watch and
talk about film? And what do we learn about moving pictures when we study
literature? We are all familiar (if not bored to tears) with talk of ‘the film of the
book’ and even ‘the book of the film’, with discussion of how the film version
is or is not faithful to the ‘original’ book version, of whether the film is as good
as the book or vice versa. We want to get away from such talk: to put it simply,
the film of the book is a film, it’s not a book. We need a different vocabulary and
different critical perspectives. Film is, nevertheless, inextricably tied in with
the study of literature. Thinking about film provides innovative ways of think-
ing about literature, and vice versa. While the study of one informs, stimulates
and provokes the study of the other, however, we do not want to suggest that
the specificity of literature can or should be done away with. Our purpose in
this chapter is, above all, to elucidate and explore the nature of the literary
through thinking about film.
Sadly, there is no DVD or YouTube clip featuring a rendition of
Wordsworth’s great nineteenth-century autobiographical epic, The Prelude
(although YouTube does offer some pretty funny Wordsworthiana). Never-
theless, in talking about moving pictures, we would like to focus on this
poem. First published after the poet’s death in 1850, The Preludewas written
and revised between 1798 and 1839. Wordsworth began writing it, in other
words, almost a hundred years before the first film (shown by the Lumière
brothers in 1895). Not only has The Preludenot been turned into a movie,
then, but it would be unreasonable to expect Wordsworth to be interested in170 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the technologies of film production. Except for the fact that the word ‘cinema’
derives from the Greek kinema, ‘motion’, and that such precursors of the
cinema as the panorama, the ‘eidophusikon’ and the ‘diorama’ were invented
and became popular during Wordsworth’s lifetime, the idea might seem
quite deranged. But, as we hope to make clear, things are not as simple as this.
In particular, we want to suggest that The Preludeis composed or organized
around a series of ‘stills’, moments taken from the moving picture of the poet’s
own mind, the cinema of his life. Wordsworth’s poem is often regarded as the
first great autobiographical narrative in English, an account of‘the growth of a
poet’s mind’ that – in the 1805 version we will concentrate on here – stretches
over 13 books and roughly nine thousand lines of blank verse. Vital to an
understanding and appreciation of The Preludeare Wordsworth’s ‘spots of
time’, which are concerned with the effects of childhood memories on
later life.
At a key moment in Book 11 of The Prelude, Wordsworth arrests the move-
ment of his narrative, to speculate on its workings:
There are in our existence spots of time,
Which with distinct preeminence retain
A renovating virtue, whence, depressed
By false opinion and contentious thought,
Or aught of heavier or more deadly weight
In trivial occupations and the round
Of ordinary intercourse, our minds
Are nourished and invisibly repaired...
Life with me,
As far as memory can look back, is full
Of this beneficent influence.
(The Prelude1805, Book 11: 257–78)
There are certain memories, especially from early childhood, which stay with
us, and have a capacity to renew, to ‘nourish’ and ‘invisibly repair’ our minds.
‘As far as memory can look back’: Wordsworth presents his autobiography
and indeed his life in visual terms, and evokes these ‘spots of time’ as a kind of
montage of moving pictures. ‘Spots of time’ are intensely visual and emphat-
ically moving. They are arresting and affecting, moving in their stillness.
Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ can be related to moving pictures in at least
three ways. A spot of time is mobile, a matter of motion, a shifting scene.
Second, it entails a moving or agitation of the mind and feelings. (The word
‘emotion’, we may recall, is from the Latin move¯re, to stir up, to create motion.)Moving pictures 171
Finally, in a way that is not only or not simply anachronistic, we might suggest
that a spot of time resembles a movie or movie clip in terms of its apparently
closed-off or framed quality (it’s a ‘spot’), and in terms more generally of what
it allows us to think about the nature and experience of time itself. Above all
perhaps, Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ prefigure modern cinema in terms
of what Gilles Deleuze calls ‘the time-image’ (Deleuze 1989). We will try to
elucidate this idea in greater detail shortly.
Wordsworth famously declares in the Preface to Lyrical Ballads(1800) that
poetry ‘takes its origin from emotion recollected in tranquillity’ (Wordsworth
1984, 611), suggesting that it involves at once a stilling and a revision or
re-gathering of what has been moving. The phrase ‘spots of time’ likewise sug-
gests something paradoxical, a strange fixing of time in place, asplace. What,
we may ask, is the ‘time’ of a ‘spot of time’? In order to start thinking about
this we need to reckon with the ways in which Wordsworth exploits the sheer
slipperiness of poetic language. Even the brief ‘spots of time’ passage quoted
a moment ago was written and revised over a period of years. In the earliest
version, in 1799, the spots of time are said to have ‘a fructifying virtue’, a little
later ‘a vivifying virtue’, and in a third version ‘a renovating virtue’ (see The
Prelude, 428, n. 2). For all their apparent stillness or tranquillity, these ‘spots
of time’ are in motion, pictured in unstable, altering, moving language.
Let us zoom in on one of these ‘spots of time’, namely the passage in which
Wordsworth recalls the experience, as a young boy, of stealing ravens’ eggs:
Nor less in springtime, when on southern banks
The shining sun had from her knot of leaves
335 Decoyed the primrose flower, and when the vales
And woods were warm, was I a plunderer then
In the high places, on the lonesome peaks,
Where’er among the mountains and the winds
The mother-bird had built her lodge. Though mean
340 My object and inglorious, yet the end
Was not ignoble. Oh, when I have hung
Above the raven’s nest, by knots of grass
Or half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
But ill sustained, and almost, as it seemed,
345 Suspended by the blast which blew amain,
Shouldering the naked crag, oh, at that time
While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,
With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind
Blow through my ears; the sky seemed not a sky
350 Of earth, and with what motion moved the clouds!172 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The mind of man is framed even like a breath
And harmony of music...
(The Prelude1805, Book 1: 333–52)
This ‘spot of time’ apparently ends with the words ‘with what motion moved
the clouds!’ We have quoted the words that follow on from it in order to draw
attention to the remarkable, often unfathomable breaks that characteristically
splice together Wordsworth’s poetry. Having concluded his moving picture of
this spot of time, he starts a new verse-paragraph, now in a quite different tone
and place: ‘The mind of man is framed even like a breath / And harmony of
music’. But the boy Wordsworth is literally left hanging, clinging to the tiny
fissures in the rock and seeming to be held in place largely by the wind itself.
With the extraordinary editing of this moment, with this singular cliffhanger,
we are offered a fitting example of what Paul de Man calls Wordsworth’s
‘sheer language’ (de Man 1984, 92). ‘Sheer language’ means language alone,
working by itself, in the sense that our access – and indeed Wordsworth’s
access – to these memories of stealing ravens’ eggs is in and through language.
But we might also hear in ‘sheer language’ the sense of something precipitous,
vertiginously headlong. The blank on the page immediately following ‘with
what motion moved the clouds!’ figures a sort of abyss.
Wordsworth chooses to stop the spot, leaves himself (a portrait of the poet
as a young thief) on a perilous ridge, just about hanging on by ‘knots of grass
/ Or half-inch fissures in the slippery rock’. ‘Oh, when I have hung / Above’:
which way up is he? What is the point of view? This last question actually
enfolds three questions, each of them as relevant to film as to literary studies:
(1) What is the point of view in a literal sense? From what position or angle is
this being seen? (2) What is the narrative point of view? Who is seeing it and
who is describing it, and from what perspective or perspectives? (3) What is
the temporal perspective? How are issues of past, present and future involved
here? From what position in time is this ‘spot of time’ to be viewed? One of the
most important differences between literary narrative and film narrative is
that, with the former, the reader is almost always presented with a knowledge
of what is going on in the thoughts and feelings of a specific narrator or char-
acter. With literary narrative you get ‘inside information’ as to what is going on
in the mind and body of a character. This is particularly the case when the
story is told by a so-called omniscient or (perhaps more accurately) telepathic
narrator. More generally, however, a fictional exposure of ‘secret’ interiority is
at the very heart of literature and there is something strange and magical about
this – about the idea of being able to read the mind of the author, a narrator
or character. This interiority is fundamentally alien to film: the ‘eye of theMoving pictures 173
camera’ is doomed to the visible. The only way that film can provide ‘inside
information’ is through strategies or techniques from literature (the ‘telling’
voice-over, in particular).
Being John Malkovich(dir. Spike Jonze, 1999) is a witty, at moments hilar-
ious movie that ironically acknowledges and foregrounds these limits. The film
involves the discovery and exploitation of a ‘portal’ through which people
are able to enter the head of the ‘real-life’ actor and have the chance of ‘being
John Malkovich’. One of the most memorable scenes is when Malkovich
himself insists on going through the portal and finds himself (as it were) in a
dreamlike restaurant-cum-nightclub surrounded by other John Malkovichs.
At a table where a couple of John Malkovichs are dining, he looks over the
restaurant menu and sees that it consists entirely of dishes called ‘Malkovich’.
Everywhere he is confronted by a proliferation of John Malkovichs, all of
them saying (or singing) over and over again the single word ‘Malkovich’,
‘Malkovich’, ‘Malkovich’. In this cinematic hall of mirrors everyone is the
same, the name says it all, and interiority is rendered comically non-existent.
Wordsworth’s account of stealing ravens’ eggs allows us a particularly inti-
mate sense of the poet’s interior world. While Spike Jonze’s film seems at once
to celebrate and ridicule the mad narcissism of a stammering ‘Malkovich,
Malkovich, Malkovich’, Wordsworth’s poetry offers us a rather different
experience of what Keats called the ‘egotistical sublime’ (Keats 1958, 1:387).
As William Hazlitt once remarked: Wordsworth ‘sees nothing but himself
and the universe...His egotism is in some respects a madness’ (Hazlitt
1930–34, 5:163). This conception of Wordsworth corresponds, perhaps
rather unnervingly, to how Hugo Münsterberg described the impact of
cinema in his 1916 book, The Photoplay: A Psychological Study: ‘the mass-
ive outer world has lost its weight, it has been freed from space, time, and
causality, and has been clothed in the forms of our own consciousness’
(Münsterberg 1916, 220, quoted in Armstrong 1998, 240). We might be
tempted to think of Wordsworth’s account of stealing ravens’ eggs as pro-
foundly ego-centred: what else would you expect from that self-regarding
genre known as autobiography? But we would argue that the poem also goes
far beyond this obsession with self. Besides the strange and disorienting ambi-
guity of the literal ‘point of view’ of the ‘plunderer’ (above or below the sky,
upside down or right way up?), for example, there are the temporal disjunc-
tions of the scene. This ‘spot of time’ is both ‘at that time’ (l.346), in the past,
and at the same time it is in this strange ‘here and now’ of sheer language, being
written or being read, still. It is also, crucially, a moving picture that entails an
intimate sense of the unknowable and incalculable. It involves a logic of
unforeseeable becoming: ‘spots of time’ work ‘invisibly’, we are told, and go174 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
on working, work on, in the future. The scene shifts inwardly, from the present
perfect tense (‘when I have hung’ [l.341]) to the simple past (‘I hung’). The
place of the present ‘I’, the ‘I’ that recollects, speaks or writes, gives way to an
image of alien suspension, an ‘I’ blown through with ‘strange utterance’, lost
to an alien sky: ‘With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind / Blow
through my ears; the sky seemed not a sky / Of earth, and with what motion
moved the clouds!’
Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo(1958) is also a masterpiece of suspense. In the
opening sequence the protagonist Scottie (James Stewart) is seen hanging on
for dear life to the ripped guttering of a San Francisco rooftop as a police
officer, having tried to help him, plummets to his death. As Susan White puts
it: ‘we never see (or hear about) Scottie’s rescue – in a sense [he] remains hang-
ing over the edge of the precipice throughout the film’ (White 1991, 911).
Something similar happens in The Prelude: in a sense the boy trying to steal
ravens’ eggs remains hanging there throughout the rest of that epic poem. The
moment in Vertigois, we might say, weirdly Wordsworthian. On the one hand
it is difficult not to project (the word is as much cinematic as psychoanalytic)
back on to the past, on to literary works of the pre-film era, critical ideas and
perspectives generated by film. On the other, it is striking how many of our
current ways of thinking were in fact already quite firmly established in the
nineteenth century.
Had he still been living when cinema began, Wordsworth would have been
at once fascinated and appalled. With its intimations of cinematicity, however,
The Prelude also suggests that he would not have been entirely surprised
either. Wordsworth’s poem communicates the power of ocularcentrism,
of what he calls ‘The state.../ In which the eye was master of the heart...
The most despotic of our senses’ (Book 11: 170–3). The quasi-hypnotic draw
of twenty-first-century ‘visual culture’ (TV, video, cinema, DVD, computer
games, and so on) was, we might say, already in play in Wordsworth’s day.
Thus the poet reminisces, for example, about ‘Still craving combinations of
new forms, / New pleasure, wider empire for the sight’ (Book 11: 191–2). And
while, in his amazing account of life in London (in Book 7), he conveys a moral
disapproval of such newfangled visual pleasures as panoramas and ‘mimic
sights that ape / The absolute presence of reality’ (Book 7: 248–9), his own
depiction of the city and its inhabitants is achieved through a series of moving
pictures. In this way he evokes London as ‘the quick dance / Of colours, lights
and forms, the Babel din, / The endless stream of men and moving things’
(Book 7: 156–8). And in one of the most memorable encounters anywhere in
his poetry, Wordsworth picks out – or feels uncannily picked out by – a blind
beggar ‘amid the moving pageant’ (Book 7: 610). The ‘spectacle’ at the centre
of this ‘moving pageant’ is reproduced and interiorized in turn as a movingMoving pictures 175
picture, a kind of monstrous mill in Wordsworth’s mind: ‘My mind did at
this spectacle turn round / As with the might of waters...I looked, / As if
admonished from another world’ (ll.616–23).
In another ‘spot of time’ in The Prelude, Wordsworth recalls when, aged
five, he is out riding with a servant (or ‘guide’) called James, becomes separ-
ated from him and stumbles on alone, down to a valley where ‘in former times
/ A murderer had been hung in iron chains’ (Book 11: 288–9). Nearby he
comes across the eerie graffiti of ‘fresh and visible’ letters scored in the turf
where ‘Some unknown hand had carved the murderer’s name’ (l.293). He
quickly quits this ‘spot’, ‘reascending the bare common’ (ll.301–2), approach-
ing ‘A naked pool that lay beneath the hills’ (l.303) overlooked by a summit
with a stone beacon on top. Closer at hand, he sees a windblown girl bearing a
pitcher on her head. And, all of a sudden, he is halted at this sight:
It was, in truth,
An ordinary sight, but I should need
Colours and words that are unknown to man
To paint the visionary dreariness
Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide,
Did at that time invest the naked pool,
The beacon on the lonely eminence,
The woman, and her garments vexed and tossed
By the strong wind. (Book 11: 307–15)
Wordsworth writes of painting with colours and words that are unknown (not
yet, perhaps never to be, invented), as if it were a matter of something fixed, the
landscape painting of a visionary dreariness (in effect, a seeing of seeing, a
vision of visionariness); and yet, as with the earlier passage we encountered
(‘with what motion moved the clouds!’), it is at the same time explicitly a ques-
tion of a moving picture (the girl’s ‘garments vexed and tossed / By the strong
wind’). Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ are concerned with senses of movement
that have yet to be captured in colours or words.
In this respect his writing offers a singular twist to the classic tradition of
ut pictura poesis, in which painting and poetry are regarded as ‘sister arts’,
painting being seen as a kind of mute poetry and poetry a speaking picture. In
his Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres(1759–83), Hugh Blair echoes this
tradition when he argues that ‘a true poet makes us imagine that we see [the
object or natural landscape] before our eyes; he catches the distinguishing
features; he gives it the colours of life and reality; he places it in such a light that
a painter could copy it after him’ (Blair 1842, 549). Wordsworth’s concern
is rather with the sense of an impossible word-painting, with a sense of the
impossibility of ekphrasis(a verbal representation of the visual). He is moved176 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
by a vision he can neither paint nor describe, that is not yet realized or realiz-
able. In this way we might suggest that Wordsworth’s spots of time are con-
cerned with that sense of ‘moving’ evoked in the ‘Intimations’ ode, where the
child is described as ‘Moving about in worlds not realized’. They are (about)
moving pictures, visions in process, still to be realized, as well as sights that
move, disturb, exhilarate, stir the emotions.
Finally, our attempt to explore the moving pictures ofWordsworth’s ‘spots
of time’ might helpfully be illuminated by brief discussion of the work of the
philosopher Gilles Deleuze (1925–95). Deleuze has provided perhaps the
most provocative account of cinema in recent decades. His books Cinema 1:
The Movement-Image(Deleuze 1986) and Cinema 2: The Time-Image(Deleuze
1989) are complex and challenging, in particular because he argues that
cinema alters the very nature of thinking, writing and philosophy. Elaborating
on the work of Henri Bergson, Deleuze contends that the universe becomes
‘a cinema in itself, a metacinema’ (Deleuze 1986, 59). With cinema, Deleuze
argues, we see‘seeing’. It is no longer a question of‘point of view’, of someone’s
(a character’s or a director’s) point of view. The eye of the camera is not an ‘I’.
As Claire Colebrook glosses it: ‘What makes the machine-like movement of
the cinema so important is that the camera can “see” or “perceive” without
imposing concepts. The camera does not organise images from a fixed point
but itself moves across movements’ (Colebrook 2002, 32). Related to this
is what Deleuze calls the ‘time-image’, that is to say the way in which cinema
presents us with a thinking or experience of time cut off from any question of a
succession of past-present-future.
The time-image is not an image ofsomething, it is what comes about with
the effects of ‘false continuity and irrational cuts’ (Deleuze 1989, xi), for ex-
ample with a certain disjunctiveness of seeing and hearing. Such disjunctive-
ness is evident from the very start of Hitchcock’s Vertigo, as we are presented
with the spiralling graphics and seeing of seeing in Kim Novak’s eye, Bernard
Herrmann’s madly melodramatic, ‘irrational’ soundtrack accompanying us
into the opening realization of vertigo in the image of Scottie hanging from the
rooftop. The opening of Vertigoillustrates the distinctiveness of the cinematic
image which, according to Deleuze, involves ‘a dissociation of the visual and
the sound’ (Deleuze 1989, 256). And although it is a poem, something like
this vertiginous ‘dissociation’ might be read back into Wordsworth’s juxta-
position of the unearthly sky and moving motion of the clouds and the ‘strange
utterance’ of ‘the loud dry wind’ as his younger self clings to the ‘slippery
rock’ in The Prelude.
Deleuze’s work engages with new kinds of thinking, writing and becoming.
His books on cinema, along with his writings on literary texts, challenge usMoving pictures 177
with the question: how should we think, read and write about literature after
cinema, or with what we have learnt from cinema in mind? And, indeed, what
new kinds of literary writing might be envisaged? Leo Tolstoy appears to
have foreseen such questions when he commented in 1908, a year before he
died and almost twenty years before the first talkies:
[cinema] will make a revolution in our life – in the life of writers...We
shall have to adapt ourselves to the shadowy screen and to the cold
machine. A new form of writing will be necessary...This swift change of
scene, this blending of emotion and experience – it is much better than the
heavy, long-drawn-out kind of writing to which we are accustomed. It is
closer to life. In life, too, changes and transitions flash before our eyes,
and emotions of the soul are like a hurricane. The cinema has divined the
mystery of motion. And that is its greatness. (Tolstoy, quoted in Murphet
and Rainford 2003, 1)
As Colin MacCabe remarks, in a recent essay entitled ‘On Impurity: the
Dialectics of Cinema and Literature’, ‘it is impossible to give a serious account
of any twentieth-century writer without reference to cinema’ (MacCabe 2003,
16). This is the case not only with such cinematically self-conscious writers as
John Dos Passos, Gabriel García Márquez or Salman Rushdie, but also with
writers such as Virginia Woolf, James Joyce and T.S. Eliot. In an interview
entitled ‘The Brain Is the Screen’ (1986), Deleuze uses cinema to make some
illuminating remarks about works of art in general. He offers a compelling
vision of the nature of literary works, the future of moving pictures and
‘new emotions’:
A work of art always entails the creation of new spaces and times (it’s not a
question of recounting a story in a well-determined space and time; rather,
it is the rhythms, the lighting, and the space-times themselves that must
become the true characters). A work should bring forth the problems and
questions that concern us rather than provide answers. A work of art is a
new syntax, one that is much more important than vocabulary and that
excavates a foreign language in language. Syntax in cinema amounts to the
linkages and relinkages of images, but also to the relation between sound
and the visual image. If one had to define culture, one could say that it [con-
sists in] perceiving that works of art are much more concrete, moving, and
funny than commercial products. In creative works there is a multiplication
of emotion, a liberation of emotion, and even the invention of new emo-
tions. This distinguishes creative works from the prefabricated emotions of
commerce. (Deleuze 2000, 370)178 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
If it is impossible to read modernist and postmodern literature without engag-
ing with questions of cinema, it is also the case that we can no longer read
Wordsworth without doing so through the kinds of thinking that cinema
makes possible. At the same time, it is part of the cryptic and enduring power
of Wordsworth’s poetry, and of his ‘spots of time’ in particular, that they can
continue to give us new ways of thinking about emotions, liberating and
inventing in moving pictures.
Further reading
Literature and Visual Technologies: Writing After Cinema, eds. Murphet
and Rainford (2003) is a valuable collection of essays on the comparatively
new field of reading film through literature and literature through film. For
two valuable recent studies especially concerned with cinema and Modernist
literature, see Laura Marcus’s The Tenth Muse: Writing About Cinema in the
Modernist Period(2007) and David Trotter’s Cinema and Modernism(2007).
For two other critical works that, like the present chapter, are concerned with
thinking about literature in relation to the history and prehistory of cinema,
see Bill Readings’s ‘Milton at the Movies’ (in Readings and Schaber 1993)
and Grahame Smith’s Dickens and the Dream of Cinema (2003). Gilles
Deleuze’s Cinema 2: The Time-Image(1989) is a fascinating and profound
study, though certainly not easy on a first encounter. Claire Colebrook’s intro-
ductory book, Gilles Deleuze(2002), is a lucid and invaluable guide to this
difficult but important thinker. For a recent collection of essays more speci-
fically focusing on Deleuze and the literary, see Buchanan and Marks (2000).
For important more recent work on cinema and time, see Philip Rosen’s
Change Mummified(2001), Mary Ann Doane’s The Emergence of Cinematic
Time (2002) and Laura Mulvey’s Death 24x a Second: Stillness and the
Moving Image(2006). On the power of the eye and vision, see (so to speak)
Martin Jay’s monumental The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century
French Thought (1993), and, more generally in relation to textuality, the
fine range of essays collected in Vision and Textuality (eds Melville and
Readings, 1995). For a recent study of feeling, affect and being moved, see
Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s Touching Feeling (2003). For excellent accounts
of the long-standing literary-critical tradition of interest in the interaction
of word and image, see Mitchell, ‘Iconology’ (1986) and ‘Picture Theory’
(1994), Krieger, ‘Ekphrasis’ (1992), and Heffernan, ‘Museum of Words’
(1993). For a fine account of Romanticism and visuality, see Sophie Thomas’s
book of that title (2008).