27. The colony
Colonialism, postcolonialism, neocolonialism: three isms that depend
upon the figure of the colony. In the preface to this book we remark that
theory – particularly when it takes the form of isms– can seem intimidating or
simply boring. Deeply desiring to be neither, we also have good theoretical
reasons for feeling wary of isms. As Martin Heidegger put it: ‘Every mere ism
is a misunderstanding and the death ofhistory’ (Heidegger 1967, 60–1). This
assertion draws attention to the ways in which ismsinevitably encourage gen-
eralization, abstractness, a lack of critical clarity and of historical awareness.
But saying this of course does not make ismsgo away. Ismsare convenient, as
well as deadly. Here are three convenient, if deadly, definitions: ‘colonialism’
is ‘the policy or practice of obtaining, or maintaining hold over, colonies, esp
with the purpose of exploiting them’ (Chambers Dictionary); ‘postcolonial-
ism’ is concerned with what ‘occur[s] or exist[s] after the end of colonial rule’
(Shorter OED); ‘neocolonialism’ is concerned with the continuing effectsof
colonialism after the end of colonial rule, and thus with a questioning of the
break implied by the post- of ‘postcolonial’. Much ism-izing energy has been
spent on the distinctions or lack of distinctions between these various terms.
For example, the authors of The Empire Writes Back(1989) argue that the
term ‘postcolonial’ should be seen as covering ‘all the culture affected by
the imperial process from the moment of colonization to the present day’
(Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin 1989, 2). This definition mingles colonialism
and ‘postcoloniality’, and also mixes itself up with the arguably more rigorous
and precise conception of ‘neocolonialism’ as involving ‘the half-hidden nar-
ratives of colonialism’s success in its continuing operations’ (Young 1991b,
3). Rather than engage directly with these various isms, we propose in thisThe colony 243
chapter to try to reflect on them indirectly, by focusing on what is common to
them all (the colony) and by considering a series of related topics: language,
time, point of view, writing, law, justice and drama.
The word ‘colony’ itself is suggestive: in etymological terms a patriarchal
and agricultural metaphor (Latin coloniaa colony, from colonusa husbands-
man, from colereto till), ‘colony’ is, according to Chambers, ‘a name vaguely
applied to a state’s dependencies overseas or abroad...; a body of persons
settled in a foreign country, or forming a separate ethnic, cultural or occupa-
tional group; the settlement so formed; the place they inhabit’. One thing is
already clear from this definition: the colony, and all the ismsit colonizes, has
to do with the colonizing power and effects of language itself, with language
as colonization. There is no concept of the colony in the English language
that does not depend on the colonization of English by Latin – which is also to
say, the colonization of Latin by English. Correspondingly, we might ask,
is US English colonized by British English or is it the other way round?
Colonization here, as always, works in two directions: to colonize is, how-
ever imperceptibly or insidiously, to be colonized. If, as William Burroughs
claimed, language is a virus, this is because it is a colonizer. In particular as
‘dependency overseas or abroad’ or ‘settlement in a foreign country’, a colony
always involves the imposition of a foreign language; and all the colonialist
wars in history (there are perhaps no other) are also wars in and over language.
Finally, however, we may suppose that there is no way of thinking about any
of these matters in one’s own language without being already colonized by
language. Colonization is at the origin: we are always already dependants of
language, colonized by one or more languages.
To be ‘always already’ is to be unsure, among other things, about one’s
sense of time. In this and other respects, the notion of colony has a strange rela-
tion to time. As its etymology indicates, ‘colony’ is fundamentally a spatial
term: originally it has to do with tilling the land. When we think about colonies
we think, first perhaps, of space, of the appropriation and exploitation ofland.
But questions of time are just as important in a (post- or neo-) colonialist con-
text. Indeed, as we indicated a few moments ago, the very terms ‘post-’ and
‘neo-’ are temporal, concerned with what comes after or continues to haunt
the colony. Literary texts offer especially good illustrations of how the colony
deranges and disorders the sense not only of place but also of time. We could
consider this, for example, in relation to Conrad’s Heart of Darkness(1902).
On the one hand, there is a clear and irrefutable historical context for the nar-
rative: it is a novel about the European (especially Belgian and British) colonial
exploitation of Africa (especially the Congo) in the late nineteenth century. On244 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the other hand, however, and at the same time, the novel conveys a particularly
strong sense of this journey to the colonial heart of darkness as a journey into
another time. As Marlow recounts:
Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest beginnings of the
world...The broadening waters flowed through a mob of wooded
islands; you lost your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted
all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought your-
self bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had once known
– somewhere – far away – in another existence perhaps. (48)
Conrad’s novel is both historically specific (it illuminates the barbarity of
European colonialism in Africa) and pervasively dreamlike (at once timeless
and primordial). Jean Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea(1966) also characterizes the
colony as unsettling any ‘homely’ sense of time, in particular by evoking the
strange timelessness of dreaming and trance. For the unnamed Mr Rochester
(the colonizer who is also colonized by his time in the West Indies) the
unnamed Windward Island, where he and Antoinette spend their honey-
moon, is ‘quite unreal and like a dream’ (49). Indeed his colonial experience
as a whole may be described as ‘all...a nightmare’ (76). But the strangeness
works in two directions. Thus England in turn is repeatedly evoked in terms
of the timelessness of a dream for Antoinette (49, 70). Just as Heart of
Darknesstraces a disturbing, circular structure which returns the narrative,
finally, to London as the ‘heart of darkness’, so Rhys’s novel complicates our
sense of time in more general narrative terms. Its disordering of temporality
has to do, above all, with its status as a prequel to Charlotte Brontë’s Jane
Eyre. Post- but also pre-Jane Eyre, it exposes the colonialist dimensions
of the earlier novel before the event.
Finally, we could consider the example of Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall
Apart (1958). Achebe’s novel recounts the rise and fall of a man called
Okonkwo, and tells how Christian white men come to colonize and largely
destroy the culture and identity of the Igbo tribe to which he belongs. Like
Heart of Darknessand Wide Sargasso Sea, Things Fall Apartis temporally
deranged and deranging: it is impelled by Achebe’s own ‘decolonizing’ mis-
sion of seeking to write an alternative version of Conrad’s novel, specifically
from the perspective of the colonized. Yet Achebe’s narrator is obliged to
occupy a sort of double-time – at once from the late nineteenth-century time of
the novel’s action (narrating as if from withinthe Igbo tribe) and from the mid-
twentieth-century time of its telling (narrating from a position outsidethe tribe
and from a considerable distance in time). Achebe’s novel is an extraordinary
meditation on the difficulty of saying when‘things fall apart’, of determiningThe colony 245
when, for example, colonization happens, or when the colonial becomes post-
colonial. This difficulty is marked, above all, in the title of the novel, with its
haunting suspension in the present tense, and in the fact that it is a quotation.
The phrase ‘things fall apart’ is taken from W.B. Yeats’s ‘The Second Coming’
(1919), a poem that is inseparable from Christian mythology and inseparable
in turn from the colonialist context of the First World War and the Irish
Troubles. Achebe’s novel, from its title onwards, is written (however critically
or ironically) in the language of the Christian colonizer.
If from a literary perspective the twentieth century is ‘the age of Kafka’, as
Harold Bloom asserts (Bloom 1994, 448), Kafka’s work is perhaps not the
most obvious to turn to for thinking about issues of the colony. Let us, how-
ever, consider a short story that may help to dislodge this assumption. ‘In the
Penal Colony’ (In der Strafkolonie) was written in October 1914 and first pub-
lished shortly after the First World War, in 1919. It is one of Kafka’s grimmest
and least funny stories. Set in an unnamed penal colony, on an unnamed
island, it focuses on a number of unnamed characters and is told – primarily
from the perspective of an unnamed ‘explorer’ – by an uncannily knowledge-
able or telepathic third-person narrator. The explorer has been invited by the
commandant of the colony to witness the execution of a soldier who has been
‘condemned to death for disobedience and insulting behaviour to a superior’
(140). The story focuses on the gruesome and terrifying machine that is to
bring this execution about, and on the ‘officer’ whose proud, even sacred,
responsibility it is to explain the machine to the explorer and ensure that it
does its work. By a characteristically eerie Kafkaesque twist, the officer ends
up freeing the prisoner and putting himself to death in his place; the story
concludes with the explorer leaving the island on a boat with an unnamed
ferryman.
The interest of Kafka’s narrative in terms of issues of (post- or neo-) colon-
ialism has to do with four related ideas: point of view, writing, law and justice.
First, it dramatizes the problem and importance of ‘point of view’, both in a
narratological and also in a more broadly cultural and political sense. It offers
a basis for thinking about questions such as: From what perspective or point
of view can or should one think about, say, Shakespeare’s Othello (1604),
Austen’s Mansfield Park (1814), Forster’s A Passage to India (1924),
Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children(1981) or indeed any other literary work that
engages with colonial differences? And more broadly, from what point of
view does one make ethical and other judgements about other people, other
societies and cultures? Kafka’s story does this by exploring (a word in our
critical vocabulary that suddenly takes on a new ‘colonizing’ dimension) the
explorer’s dilemma from his own point of view: ‘The explorer thought to246 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
himself: It’s always a ticklish matter to intervene decisively in other people’s
affairs. He was neither a member of the penal colony nor a citizen of the state
to which it belonged’ (151). The explorer is a foreigner, a stranger, but he is
also described as being ‘conditioned by European ways of thought’ (155).
How should the man respond to the seemingly undeniable ‘injustice of the
procedure and the inhumanity of the execution’ (151)? Kafka’s text does not
offer any simple answer to this question, focusing instead on the increasingly
intolerable suspense of withholding judgement. At the same time the story
generates an overwhelming sense of the explorer’s unique position and res-
ponsibility: he is seen as ‘an illustrious foreigner’ (155) in a privileged position
to pass comment and influence events. Indeed, Kafka’s story gives a further,
more incisive inflection to the dilemma. For while there is judgement and
decision within the story (the explorer makes clear his strong disapproval of
the machine and the punishment; the officer in turn makes a firm decision to
free the condemned man and take his place), the reader is left finally with what
is in some respects the most ‘ticklish matter’ of all, namely: who is the narrator
of this story, what point of view does he or she have on everything that goes on
in the text, and what, in the light of this, is our own point of view? As Gilles
Deleuze and Félix Guattari have observed, ‘It is by the power of his non-
critique that Kafka is so dangerous’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1986, 60). ‘In the
Penal Colony’ dramatizes an extraordinary experience of solitude, by posing
the question of point of view as a necessary but radically uncertain experience
of responsibilityfor each and any reader. To read the story is to be colonized
by this dangerous power.
Second, Kafka’s text foregrounds the importance of writing itself, of textu-
ality. One of the continuing controversies within the general area of postcolon-
ialist thinking concerns the theoretical complexity of some of its best-known
practitioners. Thus postcolonialist theory is perceived as being ‘depressingly
difficult’ (Williams and Chrisman 1993, ix), above all on account of its seem-
ingly abstract, unworldly focus on ‘discourse’ and ‘textuality’. Edward Said,
Gayatri Spivak and Homi Bhabha in particular have come to be seen as what
Dennis Walder calls ‘the three police officers of the postcolonial’ (Walder
1998, 4). In his engaging book Post-Colonial Literatures in English, Walder
seeks to evade the long arm of the law while trying to keep his sights trained on
postcolonial literary works themselves. This is a bold but also risky strategy.
As Ania Loomba puts it: ‘Many writings on colonial or postcolonial discourse
may not expressly privilege the textual, but they implicitly do so by interpret-
ing colonial relations through literary texts alone’ (Loomba 1998, 95). As
Kafka’s story suggests, when it comes to thinking about the colony, there is no
getting away from the founding complexity of questions of textuality, from theThe colony 247
uncanny character of writing, from the limits of the readable. For law itself is
inseparable from textuality, writing, inscription. Moreover, Kafka’s story is
also a disturbing account oflaw in terms of different, even mutually unintellig-
ible, incommensurable languages or discourses: different characters speak,
read and fail to understand different languages. The punishment for the con-
demned man in Kafka’s story involves a harrow which inserts innumerable
needles into the prisoner’s body and gradually inscribes in his flesh ‘whatever
commandment [he] has disobeyed’ (144). The officer patiently explains:
‘there are two kinds of needles arranged in multiple patterns. Each long
needle has a short one beside it. The long needle does the writing, and the
short needle sprays a jet of water to wash away the blood and keep the
inscription clear.’ (147)
The words being inscribed in this case are ‘HONOUR THY SUPERIORS!’
(144). For the condemned man the sentence is unreadable, unknown, until it
is literally written on his body, by which time he will be at the point of death,
beyond all sense of honour, beyond any sense at all.
Finally, Kafka’s story provokes the thought that every colony is a penal
colony. Every colony entails the imposition of codes of law,justice and punish-
ment from elsewhere, from back ‘home’ or from a foreign country. This is
indeed a central issue in many colonial or postcolonial novels. Forster’s A
Passage to India, for example, turns on the question of justice and the law,
culminating in the drama of the trial scene and the attempt to have Dr Aziz
found guilty of attempted rape. Likewise in Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea, every-
thing depends on the colonizing power of ‘English law’ (see 5, 11, 69) and
what Christophine calls the ‘damn cold lie’ of that English word, ‘“justice”’
(94). Similarly, we may recall that Heart of Darknessconcludes with Marlow’s
meditation on the idea that Kurtz had ‘wanted only justice’ (111), while
Things Fall Apartends with the self-justificatory cogitations of the District
Commissioner who is to write a mere paragraph about what we as readers have
spent a book experiencing and who has decided, ‘after much thought’, to en-
title his work The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger(148).
‘Be just’: these are the key words of Kafka’s brief and terrifying text, ‘In the
Penal Colony’. The dictum appears, according to the officer, among the papers
of the former commandant of the colony. But the explorer cannot read it:
Now the officer began to spell it, letter by letter, and then read out the
words. ‘“BE JUST!” is what is written there,’ he said, ‘surely you can read
it now.’...[T]he explorer made no remark, yet it was clear that he still
could not decipher it. (161)248 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Issues of law and justice are at the heart of all (post- or neo-) colonial liter-
ature. On the one hand, as ‘In the Penal Colony’ suggests, these issues are
always context-specific; they can, and perhaps must, call for a dangerous
experience of solitude in any and every reader. The reader is judge: Be just!
The reader is put in the impossible position of trying to see from the perspect-
ive of both the explorer and the narrator at the same time and, alone, to judge
accordingly. On the other hand, such texts also remind us of the extent to
which ethical and juridical decisions are determined within a context of
specific national and state identities. Thus Kafka’s text might lead us to think
about the need for a revolution in the very concept of international law, beyond
the boundaries of any state or colony. As Jacques Derrida has proposed in
Spectres of Marx: ‘international law should extend and diversify its field to
include, if at least it is to be consistent with the idea of democracy and of
human rights it proclaims, the worldwideeconomic and social field, beyond
the sovereignty of States’ (Derrida 1994, 84).
In Plato’s philosophical colony, his imagined Republic, mimetic art,
including poetry and drama, is to be excluded. Such art is dangerous because
it ‘waters and fosters’ false feelings (Plato 1961, 832): it embodies the
uncomfortable truth that imitation is formative. This recalls the idea, pro-
posed at the outset of this chapter, that language and colonization are inex-
tricable. To imitate is to be uncertainly colonized andcolonizing. We could
consider this further in relation to the important essay called ‘Of Mimicry
and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Discourse’, by Homi Bhabha, one
of the ‘police officers’ mentioned earlier. Bhabha demonstrates how post-
Enlightenment English colonialism is dependent on a logic of imitation or
mimicry: the colonized other is obliged to mimic the language, and to vary-
ing degrees to imitate the customs, gestures and even dress of the colonizers.
This mimicry, however, is never pure: mimicry, Bhabha argues, ‘is at once
resemblance and menace’ (Bhabha 1996, 362). There is a fundamental
ambivalence in the act of colonial appropriation: the colonizer at once
desires and fears that the colonized be like him (or, less frequently, her).
Colonial mimicry, in other words, is governed by a logic of what Bhabha
describes as ‘almost the same, but not quite’ (361). In order to succeed,
colonial appropriation must fail. As Angela Smith describes it, in the context
of V.S. Naipaul’s The Mimic Menand Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea: ‘The pres-
ence of the colonial other imitating the white male colonizer disrupts the
authority of the colonizer’s language, and [reveals] an inherent absurdity in
the colonial enterprise’ (Smith 1997, xviii). The appeal and effectiveness of
Homi Bhabha’s argument is that it undermines the ‘authoritative discourse’
(362) of colonialism from within: by imitating this discourse, the colonizedThe colony 249
subject shows it to be different from itself, never at home with its own inner-
most desires.
One of the understated effects of Bhabha’s essay is to suggest how import-
ant the notions of theatre, acting and drama are for thinking about (post- or
neo-) colonialism. Indeed, it encourages us to reflect more broadly on the
extent to which personal identity is based on imitation, is inherently theatrical.
These are hardly new concerns in the context of literature. Work by critics
such as Francis Barker and Peter Hulme (1985) and Paul Brown (1994), for
example, has emphasized how deeply Shakespeare’s The Tempest(1611) is a
play about these issues. A play about strange derangements in the experience
of time as well as place, and pervasively concerned with questions of leg-
itimacy, authority and justice, The Tempestis also profoundly engaged with
the ‘colonial’ paradoxes of language, acting and identity. It is a play not least
about teaching and mimicry. Just as Prospero is Miranda’s ‘schoolmaster’
(I, ii, 172), so she in turn becomes the teacher of Caliban, the ‘slave’ whom
they find when first coming to the island. In a celebrated exchange near the
beginning of the play, she reminds Caliban: ‘I pitied thee, / Took pains to make
thee speak, taught thee each hour / One thing or other’ (I, ii, 355–7). Caliban
retorts: ‘You taught me language; and my profit on ’t / Is, I know how to curse.
The red plague rid you / For learning me your language!’ (I, ii, 365–7). There
are a number of paradoxes in play here. This exchange suggests how thor-
oughly language determines who or what we are or might become: there is no
escape from the colonizing and mimicking power of language as it annexes
one subject (Caliban) after another (Miranda). As the quibble on ‘red’ and
‘rid’ intimates, one cannot be rid of what is read, what is read cannot readily be
unread: language in The Tempestis itself a sort of plague. Caliban’s capacity
to curse, indeed his very capacity to embody any meaning at all, is an effect of
linguistic colonization. Yet his cursing at the same time can only ever be based
on a reflection or mimicking of the colonizers and, no doubt, of their own
‘innermost desires’. Caliban presents Miranda and Prospero with a disturbing
and uncertain mirroring of themselves which nothing in the play can finally
efface. This is evident in the very syntax and versification of Prospero’s final
declaration of recognition regarding Caliban: ‘this thing of darkness I /
Acknowledge mine’ (V, i, 275–6). The inverted syntax and the hesitancy
of the enjambment underscore this ambivalent sense of Prospero as not
merely owning but also, and paradoxically, being‘this thing of darkness’.
As Barker and Hulme have emphasized, The Tempestis, in various para-
doxical and intractable respects, ‘a play imbricated within the discourse of
colonialism’ (204). It is also, as we have tried to make clear, a play about acting,
imitation and mimicry. Finally, we would like to suggest that The Tempestis250 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
also a kind of colony in itself. Indeed in a sense this is just what every dramatic
work is. It establishes itself in a strange time and place of its own, linked to but
distinct from the rest of the world: the dramatic work is a site of derange-
ment, mimicry, power and transformation. As Captain Phillip, the Governor
of New South Wales, observes, in Timberlake Wertenbaker’s Our Country’s
Good(1988): ‘A play is a world in itself, a tiny colony we could almost say’ (Act
2, Scene 2). Engaged in casting a different and complex theatrical light on
that penal colony the British called Australia, Our Country’s Good is also,
like any other dramatic work, strangely resistant to being seen merely as a
representation or part of the world in which it is set. In its very title, like
Shakespeare’s The Tempest or A Midsummer Night’s Dream, it establishes
a peculiar colony, it ‘gives to airy nothing / A local habitation and a name’
(AMidsummer Night’s Dream, V, i, 16–17).
Further reading
For a good introductory book on the literary in particular, see Justin Edwards’s
Postcolonial Literature (2008). On the critical side, Nicholas Harrison’s
Postcolonial Criticism (2003) is original, thought-provoking and extremely
good in its expositions. Much valuable material is available in anthologies
such as Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin, eds, The Post-Colonial Studies Reader
(2nd edn, 2006) and Williams and Chrisman, eds, Colonial Discourse and
Post-Colonial Theory (1993). For two excellent introductory works, see
Ania Loomba’s Colonialism/Postcolonialism (1998) and Robert Young’s
Postcolonialism: A History(2001). Loomba is particularly stimulating for the
emphasis she gives to how far issues of gender and sexuality are implicated in
(post- or neo-) colonialism. Youngprovides more detailed coverage of some of
these issues in his earlier book Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture
and Race(1995). Related to issues of gender and sexuality (and indeed appo-
site in the context of the tacitly homoerotic dimensions of Kafka’s ‘In the Penal
Colony’), increasing critical attention has recently been given to the links
between the colony and queerness. On this, see, for example, Christopher
Lane’s challenging but fascinating The Ruling Passion: British Colonial
Allegory and the Paradox of Homosexual Desire (1995), Yonatan Touval’s
playful and thought-provoking essay on APassage to India, ‘Colonial Queer
Something’ (1997) and the very useful collection Postcolonial Queer, ed. John
C. Hawley (2001). For a couple of important but ‘advanced’ works in the gen-
eral field, see Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak’s A Critique of Postcolonial Reason
(1999) and The Pre-Occupation of Postcolonial Studies, ed. Afzal-Khan and
Seshadri-Crooks (2001). For an excellent general study of deconstructiveThe colony 251
thinking in relation to ‘the colony’, see Michael Syrotinski’s Deconstruction
and the Postcolonial(2007). Finally, Edward Said’s work on (post- and neo-)
colonial issues is both very accessible and highly influential: his most import-
ant books are Orientalism(1978) and Culture and Imperialism(1993).