29. The performative
I‘ confess my ignorance’: Chambers Dictionarygives this as an example of a
performative. The word ‘performative’, declared J.L. Austin in 1956, ‘is
a new word and an ugly word, and perhaps it does not mean anything very
much. But at any rate there is one thing in its favour, it is not a profound word’
(Austin 1970, 233). The present chapter is concerned to sort out what
this rather odd, perhaps unprofound word does mean. A performative is a
statement that not only describes an action but actually performs that action.
A performative is, in principle at least, the opposite of a constative state-
ment. A constative statement involves a description of how things seem to be,
a statement or assertion of something that can be true or false. ‘The teachers
are ignorant’, for example.
All language can be thought about in terms of the constative and the perfor-
mative. On the one hand, there is language as descriptive, as saying something
about something. On the other, there is language as performative, as not only
saying something but doingor performingsomething at the same time. ‘I do’
(as words spoken by the prospective wife or husband in answer to a particular
question in the marriage service), ‘I declare this meeting inquorate’, ‘I promise
to pay the bearer on demand the sum of twenty pounds’: these are all examples
in which language is clearly supposed to be doing something. If it were not,
marriage would be impossible, committee meetings would never end (or,
more happily, might never take place at all) and a twenty-pound note would be
quite worthless, a mere curiosity. The distinction between constative and per-
formative statements is derived from a particular strand of Anglo-American
philosophy known as speech-act theory. Speech-act theory is most famously
associated with the work of the Oxford philosopher J.L. Austin and in par-
ticular with his book entitled How to do Things with Words (1962). It hasThe performative 263
become an important area of contemporary philosophy and linguistics but
has also proved groundbreaking in the field of literary criticism and theory.
At first this idea may seem baffling. Surely, we may tell ourselves, literary
texts are simply ‘words on a page’ and moreover words that relate to fictional
or poetic worlds, not to the so-called real world in which marriage ceremonies
are genuinely performed, committee meetings truly take place and money is
real. But the truth of the matter is a little more complicated than this. Literary
texts can indeed be considered from the perspective of the performative. The
American poet Wallace Stevens points us in this direction when he writes in
a letter, in 1945: ‘the power of literature is that in describing the world it
creates what it describes...You are describing a world and by describing it
you are creating it’ (Stevens 1966, 495). It is in this respect that we may recall
that the very word ‘poetry’ comes from the Greek verb poieein, ‘to make’, ‘to
create’: this suggests that poetry might in fact be a making or doing, as much as
a saying or stating.
In order to start exploring this idea in more detail, we will look at one or
two poems that are particularly illuminating in this context. First of all, John
Keats’s ‘This Living Hand’ (written c. 1819):
This living hand, now warm and capable
Of earnest grasping, would, if it were cold
And in the icy silence of the tomb,
So haunt thy days and chill thy dreaming nights
That thou would wish thine own heart dry of blood
So in my veins red life might stream again,
And thou be conscience-calm’d—see here it is—
I hold it towards you—
These chilling lines, which as it happens were not published until 1892, more
than 70 years after Keats’s death, are apparently aboutthis death. The text
functions as a bizarre and complex kind of curse or threat: it suggests that if
the writer were dead (if this hand were no longer living but cold and in the
grave), ‘you’ – the reader – would be so haunted that you would be willing to
die in order that the writer could live again. The last words then weirdly sug-
gest that this hand really is still living, despite the fact that we know the poet is
dead: ‘see here it is— / I hold it towards you—’.
Keats’s poem may or may not be ‘unfinished’: we only have the text as
recorded in the margin of a manuscript of another poem. Our doubt as to
whether it is a fragment or a finished poem is part of a more general sense of
uncertainty. ‘This Living Hand’ promotes a strong sense of the strangeness of
writing as such. It testifies on the one hand (as it were) to the fact that a hand,264 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the writer’s or anyone else’s, is always capable of being outlived by the writing
which it produces. Paradoxically, what lives on is the writing and not the hand.
On the other hand (so to speak), the poem insists – in a quite threatening and
disturbing way – on the power that language has to be deictic, to point (like,
precisely, a finger) and to say ‘this’ (‘This living hand’) and ‘here’ (‘here it is’),
now, in a strangely ‘icy’ present. We may not know how we feel about this
poem, we may not know how to understand or earnestly ‘grasp’ it. But how-
ever we may want to think about it, one thing seems clear: the poem is doing
something to us as readers. It can be related to the notion of the performative
in at least two ways: first, in that it is a threat and, second, in that it enactsthe
curious logic of holding out a hand (‘This living hand’) to us as readers, here
and now. Austin notes, in How to do Things with Words, that the classic exam-
ples of performatives are ‘all with verbs in the first person singular present
indicative active...Examples are “I name”, “I do”, “I bet”, “I give” ’ (Austin
1962, 56). Other instances might include ‘I promise’, ‘I swear’, ‘I bequeath’,
‘I forgive (you)’, ‘I love (you)’, ‘I order (you)’, ‘I confess’, ‘I profess’, ‘I testify’,
and on on. Austin also adds that another ‘useful criterion’ for a performative
statement is the presence, whether explicit or implicit, of the word ‘hereby’
(57). Keats’s poem, whether considered as finished or unfinished, is clearly
saying in some sense: I hereby threaten and haunt you. (To threaten is another
sort of performative: indeed, as we hereby promise to show in greater detail
below, a promise is itself a sort of threat and a threat a promise.)
Here is another example, a three-line poem by the contemporary English
poet Michael Ayres, entitled ‘Bittersweet’ (1993):
Survivors again. I never thought we’d make it.
I never thought I could be forgotten,
Or that it would be so bittersweet.
There are intriguing similarities between the Keats and Ayres poems. Both
are concerned with the idea of survival and both can be read as poems about
themselves, in other words as poems that are self-reflexive or self-referential.
And like ‘This Living Hand’, ‘Bittersweet’ is self-reflexive in a decidedly
paradoxical sense. The deployment of the title-word ‘bittersweet’ at the very
end of the poem establishes the self-reflexive or self-referential dimension: it
invites us to suppose that what ‘would be so bittersweet’ would be the poem of
that title, the poem we are or have just been reading. The word ‘bittersweet’ at
the end of the poem leads us back to the beginning of the poem, or rather to the
very title of the poem, in a way that calls to mind Coleridge’s favourite image
for a story – that of the ouroboros, or snake with its tail in its mouth. If theThe performative 265
sense of time in this poem is paradoxical, so too of course is the very word
‘bittersweet’. This word is an oxymoron – an apparent contradiction in terms,
comparable to Milton’s phrase ‘darkness visible’ (Paradise Lost, I, 63).
Finally, Ayres’s poem is paradoxical as regards the idea of being forgotten.
The ‘I’ of this poem declares, ‘I never thought I could be forgotten’. This can
be read as saying ‘I never thought I could be forgotten and look, sure enough,
I haven’t been’, but it can also be read as saying the opposite: ‘I never thought
I could be forgotten but the truth is that I have been.’ The more plausible of
these interpretations would perhaps be the latter, but if we read the poem in
this way we encounter what appears to be its central paradox: being a survivor
involves being forgotten. How should we make sense of this? One way would
be to say that this is a love poem about the bittersweet experience of surviving
some crisis or great difficulty in a relationship: the ‘I’ of the poem survives but
only at the cost of no longer being the ‘I’ he (or she) used to be. We are left,
in this case, with the enigma of an ‘I’ who has been forgotten, but who never-
theless survives in writing, that is to say, in the very words of the poem. If ‘I’
simply depends on writing, then perhaps so does the ‘we’ referred to in the
first line. This ‘we’, in turn, could be read not only as referring to the speaker
and the speaker’s lover, for example, but also as referring to ourselves, the
poem’s readers. In this sense the poem would be doing something to us,
turning us into survivors: reading becomes bittersweet.
As if haunted by an aftertaste, we could carry on trying to describe here
what ‘This Living Hand’ and ‘Bittersweet’ seem to be doing as poems. The
basic point, however, is precisely that: they are not poems that are simply
descriptive, they are also performative. Keats’s text pulls us into its strange
and icy grasp, Ayres’s poem makes reading bittersweet. Both poems are
in fact kinds of riddle. Each is saying, in effect: without your being able fully
to understand it, this is a poem about the fact that you have read it. Each
of these poems draws particular attention to the fact that it is writing and
that it can survive its author, like a monument. In this respect both poems
exploit the monumentalizing character of writing in a way similar to that
of Shakespeare’s sonnet 55:
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this pow’rful rime,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmear’d with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.266 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.
This is a love poem which asserts that it will ‘outlive’ marble, gilded monu-
ments, masonry and so on. It is thus concerned with the idea that writing – and
this text in particular – has a capacity for monumentalization greater than that
of anything else that humans might create. Because the poem itself will last
until the end of the world (‘the ending doom’), so will the memory of the lover
who is being addressed. The haunting irony of Shakespeare’s poem is that it
constitutes not only the ‘living record’ of the lover’s ‘memory’ but also the very
existence of this lover: ‘You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.’ The poem is
not simply a ‘record’. Rather, the lover (‘you’) only exists thanks to these four-
teen lines. Poetry, then, in keeping with its etymology, can be performative in
the most radical way: it can create ‘you’.
The notion of the performative is extremely helpful for thinking about lit-
erature, then, because it allows us to appreciate that literary texts not only
describe but perform. Literary texts not only say but do things: they do things
with words and do things to us. More precisely they do things by saying.
They create the world they describe (to recall the phrasing from Stevens we
cited earlier), but this creation is not a single event, occurring at the time of
writing: it happens with every new reading of the literary work. After declar-
ing, in his poem ‘In Memory of W.B. Yeats (d. Jan. 1939)’, that ‘poetry makes
nothing happen’, the poet W.H. Auden qualifies and even contradicts this by
observing that ‘it survives’, as ‘A way of happening, a mouth’. (The mouth and
way of happening here would have to do with the reader at least as much as
with the writer.) Alongside this we could juxtapose a remark made by Jacques
Derrida, who says: ‘promising is inevitable as soon as we open our mouths –
or rather as soon as there is a text’ (Derrida 1986a, 98). A promise is, of course,
a classic example of a performative. In this context we might consider looking
at poems and other literary texts for examples of the poet, author, narrator or
characters literally making promises to the reader or to other characters.
Literary texts are more ‘promise-cramm’d’ (to borrow Shakespeare’s phrase:
see HamletIII, ii, 88) than one might have supposed. Everywhere in a literary
work, for example, that we encounter suspense, deferral of explanation,
withholding of facts or truth, hinted at revelation, anticipation, prolepsis or
flash-forward, the logic of the promise is at work.The performative 267
More generally, it is a matter of recognizing that literary texts are, in their
very structure, promises. To recall an example that Derrida gives: ‘A title is
always a promise’ (Derrida 1986a, 115). Even (or especially) with its title, a
literary text has begun to promise. As soon as there is a text, perhaps before
anyone (the poet, author, narrator or character) even opens their mouth, the
performativity of a promise is under way. In order to get a sharper sense of the
way a title works as a promise, we could consider how a text might be read if
it had a different title from the one it has been given. Imagine Shakespeare’s
King Learif it were retitled Cordelia, or Sylvia Plath’s ‘Daddy’ if it were retitled
‘Why I Love a Fascist’. Tom Stoppard captures this bizarrerie in his script for
Shakespeare in Love(1998, dir. John Madden) where the Bard’s working title
for Romeo and Julietis Romeo and Ethel the Pirate’s Daughter. And we might
wonder how differently we would conceive T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Landhad
Ezra Pound not persuaded his friend to alter the title from He Do the Police in
Different Voices. With a different title, a quite different kind of promise is being
made: the work starts doing something quite different to us.
Let us conclude with a few words about one of these examples, Sylvia
Plath’s poem ‘Daddy’. This poem is about the speaker’s love and hatred of
her father and describes the process by which she comes to exorcise him – by
‘killing’ him twice and finally driving a stake through his heart. ‘Daddy’ neatly
encapsulates many of the points we have been discussing in this chapter. If
‘Daddy’ is a particularly crucial word for this poem, starting from its very title,
so too is the word ‘do’. Plath’s text is fundamentally about doingand most
of all, we can suggest, about doing by saying, about doing things with words.
‘You do not do’, the poem emphatically opens. ‘I do, I do’, the speaker
exclaims. A powerfully disturbing rhetorical mixture of a marriage and an
execution, Plath’s poem appears at once to describe and perform the pro-
cess by which the speaker can finally disconnect herself from the addressee
(‘The black telephone’s off at the root’) and conclude: ‘Daddy, daddy, you
bastard, I’m through’. The force of the poem involves the sense that the
speaker is exorcising her father asshe speaks, that these words are what finally
get rid of him. The text is like a poetic equivalent of psychoanalysis as ‘the
talking cure’. Whether or not we construe Plath’s poem as autobiographical,
‘Daddy’ operates in the form of a kind of confession. (It is not by chance
that Plath’s work is identified with the ‘confessional school’ of poetry.) It is
here, too, that we might note how profoundly the notion of the performative
illuminates the intimate depths of psychoanalysis, just as it does the genre of
autobiography. At some level all autobiography has a confessional character: it
entails an ‘I confess’ (however implicit this may be) in which the person
confessing makes the truth.268 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
We have been dealing mainly with poems in this chapter, since they provide
an especially clear sense of how the ‘I’ of the text, or how the text itself, can be
seen to create and transform – to perform. But as the example of titles indic-
ates, the idea of the performative is of fundamental importance for all literary
texts. In conclusion we would like to suggest another way of approaching
this, namely to consider that every literary text is a kind of letter. It is a text
addressed privately to each of us, me or you in isolation, at the same time as
being a letter that has been made public, published. To read a literary text is to
agree to the idea of a possible relationship. The literary text – whether poem,
play, short story or novel – is a letter, and by reading it you become its recipi-
ent. Pursuing this analogy between a literary text and a letter, J. Hillis Miller
argues that what is particularly striking about the performative dimension of
literature is that it is in some ways fundamentally unpredictable. Literary texts
give an exemplary ‘twist’ to the conventional, Austinian notion of the perfor-
mative. Miller writes: ‘The “twist” lies in the fact that the performative power
of the letter is not foreseen or intended. This is contrary to the strict concept
of a performative utterance as defined by Austin’ (Miller 1991, 172). We have
tried to suggest the workings of such a ‘twist’ in the paradoxical and ‘riddling’
effects of the poems we have looked at: poems are performative but not in ways
that we can necessarily expect or completely, earnestly grasp. Indeed, the
‘twist’ may consist in the very failure intimated here. Every performative (a
promise or threat or whatever) is haunted by the necessary possibility that
it will fail or go astray. The ‘twist’ of performatives in literature might be illus-
trated in relation to the final words of Sylvia Plath’s poem ‘Daddy’: ‘Daddy,
daddy, you bastard, I’m through’. Something appears to be happening here,
but what? Is calling daddy ‘bastard’ a way of renouncing his legitimacy and
thus, as it were, excommunicating him? What does ‘I’m through’ mean? Can
the ‘I’ say this, while still addressing ‘daddy’? Does ‘I’m through’ mean ‘I am
finished’ or ‘I havefinished’? Or does it mean, paradoxically, that the ‘I’ is
finally through to‘daddy’, only now, beyond the last word of the poem, finally
able to address him?
Further reading
J. Hillis Miller’s work on performatives is particularly accessible. See his
excellent studies Tropes, Parables, Performatives (1991) and Speech Acts
in Literature(2001). For an essay specifically focusing on the poetic and the
riddle, see his ‘Deconstruction and a Poem’ (Miller 2000). More difficult but
extremely good are the essays of Paul de Man, for instance in his Allegories
of Reading(1979). De Man gives some startling accounts of literary texts asThe performative 269
works of persuasion. From a more psychoanalytically oriented perspective,
see also Shoshana Felman’s challenging but thought-provoking studies, The
Literary Speech Act (1983) and (especially of interest regarding the act of
promising in relation to literature, philosophy and Lacanian psychoanalysis)
The Scandal of the Speaking Body (2003). On the performative in the con-
text of British and German Romanticism, see Esterhammer’s fine book
The Romantic Performative(2000). Judith Butler’s work, especially Gender
Trouble (1990), Bodies That Matter (1993) and Excitable Speech (1997),
offers a complex but compelling account of identity, gender and politics in
general as ‘performative’ in ways explicitly indebted to J.L. Austin, even if he
would not readily have recognized them. Jonathan Culler has a helpful and
stimulating account of Butler and performative language in his Literary
Theory: A Very Short Introduction(1997).