7. Narrative
Stories are everywhere: in movies, sitcoms, cartoons, commercials, poems,
newspaper articles, novels, computer games and websites. We all make
use of stories every day and our lives are shaped by stories – stories about what
happened in our dreams or at the dentist, stories about how we fell in love or
the origins of the universe, stories about war and about peace, stories to com-
memorate the dead and to confirm a sense of who we are. In this chapter, we
propose to circle around the following propositions:
1. Stories are everywhere.
2. Not only do we tell stories, but stories tell us: if stories are everywhere, we
are also in stories.
3. The telling of a story is always bound up with power, with questions of
authority, property and domination.
4. Stories are multiple: there is always more than one story.
5. Stories always have something to tell us about stories themselves: they
always involve self-reflexive and metafictional dimensions.
Roland Barthes suggests that falling in love involves telling ourselves stories
about falling in love: in this sense, he argues, ‘mass culture is a machine for
showing desire’ (Barthes 1990c, 136). Disagreements, arguments, even wars,
are often the result of conflicting stories concerning, for example, the rights
to a piece of land: the real reason for both the first Gulf War (1991) and the
second Gulf War (2003–) may have been oil, but the technical justification for
going to war turned on the story of who owned or should own a particular
piece of Kuwait in the first instance and the existence or otherwise of weapons
of mass destruction in the second. Academic, ‘objective’ or ‘scientific’Narrative 55
discourses are constructed as stories. The historian Hayden White has given
special emphasis to the fact that history is written in the form of certain kinds
of narrative, that the task of the historian is to ‘charge...events’ with ‘a com-
prehensible plot structure’ (White 1978, 92). Science is composed of stories:
astronomy attempts to narrate the beginnings of the universe; geology seeks to
tell the story of the formation of mountains and plains, rivers, valleys and lakes;
and like Rudyard Kipling’s Just So Stories, evolutionary psychology pur-
ports to tell us the story of how we came to be as we are. For many centuries,
millions of people have come to understandings about their place in the world,
the meaning of their lives and the nature of politics, ethics and justice through
stories about the lives of Christ, Buddha or the prophet Muhammad. The
narrative of class struggle and emancipation from peasant society to the dicta-
torship of the proletariat has had a profound influence in the past 150 years.
And in the twentieth century, Sigmund Freud produced a new and scandalous
story about the nature of childhood. To say that Christianity, Buddhism,
Islam, Marxism and psychoanalysis involve stories is not to suggest that they
are merely fictive. Rather, it is to register the fact that there are few aspects of
life which are not bound up with strategies and effects of narrative.
The simplest way to define narrative is as a series of events in a specific
order – with a beginning, a middle and an end. We might think about James
Joyce’s short story ‘The Dead’, from Dubliners(1914), to illustrate the point.
Put very simply, the story begins with the arrival of Gabriel and his wife Gretta
at a party, tells of the events of the party and the couple’s walk home, and ends
as they fall asleep in their hotel. What is important in this description is the
temporal ordering of what happens. By contrast, lyric poems, for example, are
not typically thought to express or depict a series of temporally ordered series
of events. One of the ways in which lyric poetry is defined, in fact, is by the
absence of any such representation of events – lyric poems characteristically
use the present tense and exploit a sense of the presence of the speaker in the
act of meditating or speaking. Percy Bysshe Shelley’s ‘To a Sky-Lark’ (1820)
recounts no events, but is an effusion of the poet’s sense of the bird’s
‘unpremeditated art’ which he attempts both to define and in some ways to
reproduce. Similarly, while Seamus Heaney’s ‘bog poems’ from North(1975)
might dig up buried narratives of victimization, sacrifice and atonement, their
lyric tone gives a sense of an individual poet responding, now, to what he sees.
Narrative, however, is characterized by its foregrounding of a series of events
or actions which are connected in time. What happens at the end of ‘The
Dead’ is determined by what happened earlier. The events are recounted
more or less chronologically in Joyce’s story, in that the order of the telling
follows the order of the told: first we learn of Gabriel and Gretta’s arrival, then56 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of the party, and finally of what happens back at the hotel. But narratives
also invariably involve what the narratologist Gérard Genette has called
anachronisms – flashbacks, jumps forwards (or prolepses), the slowing down
and speeding up of events and other distortions of the linear time-sequence
(Genette 1986). Texts such as Virginia Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’ (1921)
dislodge our sense of temporal sequence. The story begins: ‘Perhaps it was
the middle of January in the present year’ (Woolf 1982, 41). This suggests that
the events recounted span a number of months, but by the end we have the
sense that the story follows the wanderings of the narrator’s consciousness
over only a number of minutes or, at most, hours. Despite this and many other
distortions of chronological order, however, Woolf’s text is only readable
insofar as it exploits our expectations of narrative sequence. Indeed, these
distortions themselves can only be conceived against a background of linear
chronological sequence.
Time, then, is crucial to narrative. But as the novelist E.M. Forster recog-
nizes in Aspects of the Novel(1927), the temporal ordering of events is not the
whole story. Forster makes a memorable distinction between ‘The king died
and then the queen died’ on the one hand, and ‘The king died, and then the
queen died of grief’ on the other (Forster 1976, 87). While the first ‘narrative’
includes two events related in time, he proposes, the second includes another
‘connection’, the crucial element of causality. The first simply lists two events,
while the second provides the thread of a narrative by showing how they are
related. The logical or causal connections between one event and another
constitute fundamental aspects of every narrative. An obvious example would
be detective stories. Detective stories rely, above all, on our expectation and
desire for connection. They produce quite complex routes to a revelation of
whodunnit, routes both determined and detected by the logic of cause and
effect.
The beginning–middle–end sequence of a narrative also tends to empha-
size what is known as a teleological progression – the end(in Greek, telos) itself
as the place to get to. A lyric poem does not seem to rely on its ending to pro-
vide coherence: the end is not typically the place where all will be resolved. By
contrast, we often think of a good story as one that we just cannot put down, a
novel we compulsively read to find out what happens at the end. The narrative
theorist Peter Brooks has studied ways in which readers’ desires are directed
towards the end, ways in which narratives are structured towards, or as a series
of digressions from, an ending:
we are able to read present moments – in literature and, by extension, in
life – as endowed with narrative meaning only because we read them inNarrative 57
anticipation of the structuring power of those endings that will retrospect-
ively give them the order and significance of plot. (Brooks 1984, 94)
Likewise, Brooks has elaborated the paradoxical ways in which the dénoue-
ment or tying up of a story is worked towards through the paradox of digres-
sion. Thus, for example, while we may find a novel, film or play frustrating if
it contains too many digressions from the main plot, we enjoy the suspense
involved in delaying a denouement. ‘Suspense’ movies, thrillers and so on, in
particular, exploit this strangely masochistic pleasure that we take in delay.
One of the paradoxical attractions of a good story, in fact, is often understood
to be its balancing of digression, on the one hand, with progression towards an
end, on the other.
But what is this end which we so much desire? (We may find out in more
detail below, in Chapter 34.) Brooks and others have suggested that narratives
move from a state of equilibrium or stasis through a disturbance of this stabil-
ity, and back to a state of equilibrium at the end. The end of a narrative, the
state of equilibrium, occurs when the criminal is discovered, when the lovers
get married, or when the tragic hero dies. In addition, this end is characteris-
tically the place of revelation and understanding. A part of the equilibrium
that endings apparently offer is the satisfaction of epistemophilia, the reader’s
desire to know (from the Greek episteme, knowledge, and philia, love). And
because of the conventional emphasis on hermeneutic discovery at the end,
endings tend to be particularly over-determined places: we look to the end to
provide answers to questions that the text has raised. In modernist narratives
such as Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’, however, these answers tend to be
withheld or else treated ironically. The ending of Woolf’s story is paradoxical,
in fact, in that it resolves the question with which the story starts out – what is
the mark on the wall? – by telling us that it is a snail. But this ‘answer’ to the
question simply parodies those conventional realist endings that seem to clear
up our confusions and satisfy our curiosity. So what if it is a snail? To say that
the mark is a snail is an example of what is called an aporia – an impassable
moment or point in narrative, a hermeneutic abyss. If we ask what Woolf’s story
is ‘about’, we realize that it is about itself as a story. The ending tells everything,
it gives us ‘the answer’, and it tells us nothing: it is not for this ‘answer’ that we
have read the story. Our epistemophilia proves to be perverted.
One of the most fundamental distinctions in narrative theory is that
between ‘story’ and ‘discourse’. As Jonathan Culler has suggested, a funda-
mental premiss of narratology is that narrative has a double structure: the
level of the told (story) and the level of telling (discourse) (Culler 1981). These
levels have been given different names by different theorists – the Russian58 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
formalists call them fabula and sjuzhet; the French structuralists call them
either récit(or histoire) and discours, and so on. ‘Story’, in this sense, involves
the events or actions which the narrator would like us to believe occurred, the
events (explicitly or implicitly) represented. ‘Discourse’, on the other hand,
involves the way in which these events are recounted, how they get told, the
organization of the telling. In fact, of course, these two levels can never be
entirely separated, and much narrative theory has been concerned to describe
ways in which they interact. Thus Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyreand Joyce’s
‘The Dead’, for example, present the events of the narrative more or less in the
order that they are alleged to have occurred. By contrast, texts such as Emily
Brontë’s Wuthering Heightsand Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’ move for-
ward and backward in time and shift from the level of telling to that of the told
in complex and unnerving ways. Many modernist and postmodernist texts
experiment with the relation between these two levels, to denaturalize or
defamiliarize our sense of how narratives function. A text such as Robert
Coover’s short story ‘The Babysitter’ from Pricksongs and Descants(1969),
for instance, presents several slightly different accounts of what appears to be
the same evening from a number of different perspectives: the contradictions
and dislocations produced within and between these accounts, however,
make it impossible, finally, to determine the precise nature or order of the
evening’s events. Alain Robbe-Grillet’s novels, such as The Voyeur(1955) and
Jealousy(1957), also recount the ‘same’ series of events over and over again,
but from the ‘same’ narratorial perspective: each telling, however, is subtly
different, thus dissolving our sense of any one, true, narrative of events. Rather
than reading such texts simply as exceptions or aberrations, we might
consider ways in which they metafictionally reflect on the multiplicity of
any narrative – its susceptibility to different readings, its differing narrative
perspectives, its shifting senses of place and time.
Everything that we have said about narrative up to this point has concerned
the sense of its linearity: narrative involves a linear series of actions connected
in time and through causality. In addition to this linearity, we might consider
another important aspect of narrative, namely the relation between teller and
listener or reader. Indeed, rather than appealing to the idea of a sequence of
events, Barbara Herrnstein Smith has argued that we need to ground our
understanding of narrative in terms of ‘someone telling someone else that
something happened’ (Smith 1981, 228). The significance of this proposition
is that it redirects our focus from the events or actions themselves to the rela-
tionship between the author or teller and the reader or listener. As Jonathan
Culler has put it, ‘To tell a story is to claim a certain authority, which listeners
grant’ (Culler 1997, 89). Much of the work in narrative theory has involvedNarrative 59
attempts to discriminate among different kinds of narrators (first person or
third person, objective or subjective, reliable or unreliable, so-called ‘omni-
scient’ or not, together with questions concerning his or her ‘point of view’,
his or her ‘voice’ and so on). Our understanding of a text is pervaded by our
sense of the character, trustworthiness and objectivity of the figure who is
narrating. Moreover, it is often very important to discriminate between the
narratorial point of view and that of the so-called implied author – a particu-
larly important distinction in certain ironic texts, for example. Although
Jonathan Swift’s essay ‘A Modest Proposal’ (1729) would not usually be
considered as a narrative, it does provide one of the classic examples of nar-
ratorial irony. In this essay, the narrator proposes that in order to deal with
poverty and hunger in Ireland and to prevent children of the poor from being
a burden to their parents, such children should be sold to the rich as food – a
solution that would be ‘innocent, cheap, easy, and effectual’ (509). The narra-
tor appears to make his proposal seriously but we necessarily conceive of an
‘implied author’ who has very different views and motives, and who is making
a political point about the immorality of the English government in its attitude
towards poverty in Ireland. Our understanding of the ironic force of the text
necessitates a discrimination between the two voices or personae of the
narrator and the implied author.
A consideration of the relationship between teller and listener or reader
leads in turn to questions of power and property. One of the most famous
storytellers is Scheherazade from AThousand and One Nights(a collection of
tales that originated in the Middle East in the ninth–tenth centuries). In these
classical Arabic narratives, Scheherazade has been sentenced to death by the
king but is able to stave off her execution by telling him stories. By ending her
story each night at a particularly exciting point, she is able to delay her death
for another day because the king wants to find out what happens next. What
makes A Thousand and One Nights so intriguing for narrative theorists has
to do with its enactment of forms of power. As Ross Chambers proposes, ‘To
tell a story is to exercise power’ (Chambers 1984, 50). Chambers argues that
storytelling is often used, as in the case of Scheherazade, as an ‘oppositional’
practice, a practice of resistance used by the weak against the strong: ‘opposi-
tional narrative’, he claims, ‘in exploiting the narrative situation, discovers
a power, not to change the essential structure of narrative situations, but to
change its other (the “narratee” if one will), through the achievement and
maintenance of authority, in ways that are potentially radical’ (Chambers
1991, 11). In this respect, we might consider the motives and effects of
Gretta’s story of her dead lover in ‘The Dead’: perhaps the ending of Joyce’s
narrative should be understood in terms of the diffusion of Gabriel’s egoistic,60 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
domineering and even rapacious desire for his wife by Gretta’s narration
of her love story. Gretta, subject to patriarchal society’s insistence on the
husband’s rights to the wife’s body, displaces her husband’s unwanted
attention by telling him a story. The violence of Gabriel’s desire is expressed
in references to his longing ‘to be master of her strange mood...to cry to her
from his soul, to crush her body against him, to overmaster her’ (248). By the
middle of Gretta’s narration, Gabriel sees himself, by contrast with the lover of
her story, as a ‘ludicrous figure...idealizing his own clownish lusts’ and a
‘pitiable fatuous fellow’ (251). And by the end, all lusts and all passions and
anger, all mastery and desire, have dissolved: ‘Gabriel held her hand for a
moment longer, irresolutely, and then shy of intruding on her grief, let it fall
gently and walked quietly to the window’ (253). This conflict of stories –
Gabriel’s about himself and Gretta’s about her dead lover – results in a dis-
turbance of power relations. In this sense, just as much as ‘The Mark on the
Wall’, or the stories of Coover and Robbe-Grillet, ‘The Dead’ is self-reflexively
about the power of stories. More often, of course, it is the dominant ideology
which is able to tell stories about, for example, how it got to be the dominant
ideology. In the Soviet Union, it was the Bolsheviks and later the Stalinists
who got to write the history books. In present-day China, the 1989
Tiananmen Square ‘massacre’ (as it is called in the West) is not in the history
books at all and literary works that attempt to represent it, such as Ma Jian’s
Beijing Coma(2008), are officially banned. At the same time, Chairman Mao
still figures in textbooks as a largely benevolent and wise figure (despite what
are acknowledged in China as his ‘excesses’ and what are generally regarded
in the West as his ‘atrocities’), since his ‘thought’ continues to be the basis
for current doctrine and policy of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (see
http://english.cpc.people.com.cn/66095/4471924.html).
The power exerted by Scheherazade and by Gretta is a specifically
narrativepower. The only way that these storytellers can avoid death on the
one hand and violent passion on the other is by making their stories good, by
making them compelling to the point of distraction. By contrast, as far as the
Soviet Union was concerned, for example, the Stalinist version of history did
not even have to be plausible, because its lessons would be enforced in other
ways. Narrativepower, then, may be the only strategy left for the weak and
dispossessed: without narrative power, they may not be heard. The social and
political importance of stories is eloquently expressed by the old man in
Chinua Achebe’s novel Anthills of the Savannah(1987): ‘The sounding of the
battle-drum is important; the fierce waging of the war itself is important; and
the telling of the story afterwards – each is important in its own way’ (123–4).
But, the man continues, the story is ‘chief among his fellows’:Narrative 61
‘The story is our escort; without it we are blind. Does the blind man own his
escort? No, neither do we the story; rather it is the story that owns us and
directs us. It is the thing that makes us different from cattle; it is the mark on
the face that sets one people apart from their neighbours.’ (124)
Stories own us, and tell us, Achebe suggests, as much as we own or tell stories.
There are many questions of narrative, then, which may be considered
in relation to literature: temporality, linearity and causality, so-called omni-
science, point of view, desire and power. But most of all, perhaps, it is the
relation between narrative and ‘non-’ or ‘anti-narrative’ elements that fascinate
and disturb. Aspects such as description, digression, suspense, aporia and
self-reflection, temporal and causal disorders are often what are most com-
pelling in narrative. A text such as Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’, indeed, has
no narrative outside of description and aporetic reflections on the nature
of narrative. Correspondingly, Joyce’s ‘The Dead’ depends to a large extent
on moments of what Joyce refers to elsewhere as ‘epiphany’, moments ofrevel-
ation or understanding, moments that appear to stand outside time, outside
of narrative. As Gabriel watches his wife listening to a piece of music as they
prepare to leave the party, there is just such a moment – a moment of revelation
which is also a moment of mystery. Gretta, standing listening to a song is, for
Gabriel, full of ‘grace and mystery...as if she were a symbol of something’
(240). Like Scheherazade’s, Joyce’s storytelling holds off, and hangs on,
death. And as the snow falls on the world outside the hotel window at the
end of the story, as Gabriel falls into unconsciousness and the narrative slips
away, there is another moment of epiphany, a dissolution of time, of space,
of life, of identity, desire and narrative.
Further reading
Wallace Martin, Recent Theories of Narrative (1986), Shlomith Rimmon-
Kenan, Narrative Fiction (2002) and H. Porter Abbott, The Cambridge
Introduction to Narrative (2002) all provide good, clear introductions to
narrative theory, while David Herman, ed., The Cambridge Companion to
Narrative(2007) is a useful collection of clear and helpful accounts of various
dimensions of the topic. See also Herman, Manfred John and Marie-Laure
Ryan, eds, The Routledge Encyclopaedia of Narrative Theory, for a compre-
hensive survey of the field, and Gerald Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology
(2004) for concise accounts of its principal concepts. J. Hillis Miller’s
essay ‘Narrative’ (1990) is a concise and accessible summary of a number of
paradoxes in narrative. Gérard Genette’s Narrative Discourse (1986) is an62 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
influential systematic account of the structure of narrative. Another modern
classic which takes as its focus questions of narrative perspective is Dorrit
Cohn’s Transparent Minds(1978). Peter Brooks’s Reading for the Plot(1984)
explores ways in which narrative may be thought about in relation to readers’
desires; on the ‘epistemophilic urge’ in narrative, see his Body Work(1993). A
good short summary of feminist perspectives on narrative theory is Margaret
Homans’s ‘Feminist Fictions and Feminist Theories of Narrative’ (1994);
see also Lidia Curti, Female Stories, Female Bodies(1998). James Phelan has
collected some useful and provocative essays on narrative and its relationship
to issues of reading in Reading Narrative(1989) and in his more recent co-
edited collection (with Peter Rabinowitz), A Companion to Narrative Theory
(2005). Seymour Chatman’s Coming to Terms(1990) is an incisive summary
of narrative theory in relation to literary texts and film, and is especially
useful in its discussion of ideas of narrative perspective and point of view.
For a critique of traditional narratology from a poststructuralist perspective,
see Andrew Gibson, Towards a Postmodern Theory of Narrative(1996). For a
valuable and wide-ranging collection of essays on narrative theory, from Plato
to Trin Minh-Ha, focusing in particular on ‘classic’ structuralist approaches
and poststructuralist provocations, see Martin McQuillan, ed., The Narrative
Reader(2000).