

7. Narrative
Stories are everywhere: in movies, sitcoms, cartoons, commercials, poems,
newspaper articles, novels, computer games and websites. We all make
use of stories every day and our lives are shaped by stories – stories about what
happened in our dreams or at the dentist, stories about how we fell in love or
the origins of the universe, stories about war and about peace, stories to com-
memorate the dead and to confirm a sense of who we are. In this chapter, we
propose to circle around the following propositions:
1. Stories are everywhere.
2. Not only do we tell stories, but stories tell us: if stories are everywhere, we
are also in stories.
3. The telling of a story is always bound up with power, with questions of
authority, property and domination.
4. Stories are multiple: there is always more than one story.
5. Stories always have something to tell us about stories themselves: they
always involve self-reflexive and metafictional dimensions.
Roland Barthes suggests that falling in love involves telling ourselves stories
about falling in love: in this sense, he argues, ‘mass culture is a machine for
showing desire’ (Barthes 1990c, 136). Disagreements, arguments, even wars,
are often the result of conflicting stories concerning, for example, the rights
to a piece of land: the real reason for both the first Gulf War (1991) and the
second Gulf War (2003–) may have been oil, but the technical justification for
going to war turned on the story of who owned or should own a particular
piece of Kuwait in the first instance and the existence or otherwise of weapons
of mass destruction in the second. Academic, ‘objective’ or ‘scientific’Narrative 55
discourses are constructed as stories. The historian Hayden White has given
special emphasis to the fact that history is written in the form of certain kinds
of narrative, that the task of the historian is to ‘charge...events’ with ‘a com-
prehensible plot structure’ (White 1978, 92). Science is composed of stories:
astronomy attempts to narrate the beginnings of the universe; geology seeks to
tell the story of the formation of mountains and plains, rivers, valleys and lakes;
and like Rudyard Kipling’s Just So Stories, evolutionary psychology pur-
ports to tell us the story of how we came to be as we are. For many centuries,
millions of people have come to understandings about their place in the world,
the meaning of their lives and the nature of politics, ethics and justice through
stories about the lives of Christ, Buddha or the prophet Muhammad. The
narrative of class struggle and emancipation from peasant society to the dicta-
torship of the proletariat has had a profound influence in the past 150 years.
And in the twentieth century, Sigmund Freud produced a new and scandalous
story about the nature of childhood. To say that Christianity, Buddhism,
Islam, Marxism and psychoanalysis involve stories is not to suggest that they
are merely fictive. Rather, it is to register the fact that there are few aspects of
life which are not bound up with strategies and effects of narrative.
The simplest way to define narrative is as a series of events in a specific
order – with a beginning, a middle and an end. We might think about James
Joyce’s short story ‘The Dead’, from Dubliners(1914), to illustrate the point.
Put very simply, the story begins with the arrival of Gabriel and his wife Gretta
at a party, tells of the events of the party and the couple’s walk home, and ends
as they fall asleep in their hotel. What is important in this description is the
temporal ordering of what happens. By contrast, lyric poems, for example, are
not typically thought to express or depict a series of temporally ordered series
of events. One of the ways in which lyric poetry is defined, in fact, is by the
absence of any such representation of events – lyric poems characteristically
use the present tense and exploit a sense of the presence of the speaker in the
act of meditating or speaking. Percy Bysshe Shelley’s ‘To a Sky-Lark’ (1820)
recounts no events, but is an effusion of the poet’s sense of the bird’s
‘unpremeditated art’ which he attempts both to define and in some ways to
reproduce. Similarly, while Seamus Heaney’s ‘bog poems’ from North(1975)
might dig up buried narratives of victimization, sacrifice and atonement, their
lyric tone gives a sense of an individual poet responding, now, to what he sees.
Narrative, however, is characterized by its foregrounding of a series of events
or actions which are connected in time. What happens at the end of ‘The
Dead’ is determined by what happened earlier. The events are recounted
more or less chronologically in Joyce’s story, in that the order of the telling
follows the order of the told: first we learn of Gabriel and Gretta’s arrival, then56 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of the party, and finally of what happens back at the hotel. But narratives
also invariably involve what the narratologist Gérard Genette has called
anachronisms – flashbacks, jumps forwards (or prolepses), the slowing down
and speeding up of events and other distortions of the linear time-sequence
(Genette 1986). Texts such as Virginia Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’ (1921)
dislodge our sense of temporal sequence. The story begins: ‘Perhaps it was
the middle of January in the present year’ (Woolf 1982, 41). This suggests that
the events recounted span a number of months, but by the end we have the
sense that the story follows the wanderings of the narrator’s consciousness
over only a number of minutes or, at most, hours. Despite this and many other
distortions of chronological order, however, Woolf’s text is only readable
insofar as it exploits our expectations of narrative sequence. Indeed, these
distortions themselves can only be conceived against a background of linear
chronological sequence.
Time, then, is crucial to narrative. But as the novelist E.M. Forster recog-
nizes in Aspects of the Novel(1927), the temporal ordering of events is not the
whole story. Forster makes a memorable distinction between ‘The king died
and then the queen died’ on the one hand, and ‘The king died, and then the
queen died of grief’ on the other (Forster 1976, 87). While the first ‘narrative’
includes two events related in time, he proposes, the second includes another
‘connection’, the crucial element of causality. The first simply lists two events,
while the second provides the thread of a narrative by showing how they are
related. The logical or causal connections between one event and another
constitute fundamental aspects of every narrative. An obvious example would
be detective stories. Detective stories rely, above all, on our expectation and
desire for connection. They produce quite complex routes to a revelation of
whodunnit, routes both determined and detected by the logic of cause and
effect.
The beginning–middle–end sequence of a narrative also tends to empha-
size what is known as a teleological progression – the end(in Greek, telos) itself
as the place to get to. A lyric poem does not seem to rely on its ending to pro-
vide coherence: the end is not typically the place where all will be resolved. By
contrast, we often think of a good story as one that we just cannot put down, a
novel we compulsively read to find out what happens at the end. The narrative
theorist Peter Brooks has studied ways in which readers’ desires are directed
towards the end, ways in which narratives are structured towards, or as a series
of digressions from, an ending:
we are able to read present moments – in literature and, by extension, in
life – as endowed with narrative meaning only because we read them inNarrative 57
anticipation of the structuring power of those endings that will retrospect-
ively give them the order and significance of plot. (Brooks 1984, 94)
Likewise, Brooks has elaborated the paradoxical ways in which the dénoue-
ment or tying up of a story is worked towards through the paradox of digres-
sion. Thus, for example, while we may find a novel, film or play frustrating if
it contains too many digressions from the main plot, we enjoy the suspense
involved in delaying a denouement. ‘Suspense’ movies, thrillers and so on, in
particular, exploit this strangely masochistic pleasure that we take in delay.
One of the paradoxical attractions of a good story, in fact, is often understood
to be its balancing of digression, on the one hand, with progression towards an
end, on the other.
But what is this end which we so much desire? (We may find out in more
detail below, in Chapter 34.) Brooks and others have suggested that narratives
move from a state of equilibrium or stasis through a disturbance of this stabil-
ity, and back to a state of equilibrium at the end. The end of a narrative, the
state of equilibrium, occurs when the criminal is discovered, when the lovers
get married, or when the tragic hero dies. In addition, this end is characteris-
tically the place of revelation and understanding. A part of the equilibrium
that endings apparently offer is the satisfaction of epistemophilia, the reader’s
desire to know (from the Greek episteme, knowledge, and philia, love). And
because of the conventional emphasis on hermeneutic discovery at the end,
endings tend to be particularly over-determined places: we look to the end to
provide answers to questions that the text has raised. In modernist narratives
such as Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’, however, these answers tend to be
withheld or else treated ironically. The ending of Woolf’s story is paradoxical,
in fact, in that it resolves the question with which the story starts out – what is
the mark on the wall? – by telling us that it is a snail. But this ‘answer’ to the
question simply parodies those conventional realist endings that seem to clear
up our confusions and satisfy our curiosity. So what if it is a snail? To say that
the mark is a snail is an example of what is called an aporia – an impassable
moment or point in narrative, a hermeneutic abyss. If we ask what Woolf’s story
is ‘about’, we realize that it is about itself as a story. The ending tells everything,
it gives us ‘the answer’, and it tells us nothing: it is not for this ‘answer’ that we
have read the story. Our epistemophilia proves to be perverted.
One of the most fundamental distinctions in narrative theory is that
between ‘story’ and ‘discourse’. As Jonathan Culler has suggested, a funda-
mental premiss of narratology is that narrative has a double structure: the
level of the told (story) and the level of telling (discourse) (Culler 1981). These
levels have been given different names by different theorists – the Russian58 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
formalists call them fabula and sjuzhet; the French structuralists call them
either récit(or histoire) and discours, and so on. ‘Story’, in this sense, involves
the events or actions which the narrator would like us to believe occurred, the
events (explicitly or implicitly) represented. ‘Discourse’, on the other hand,
involves the way in which these events are recounted, how they get told, the
organization of the telling. In fact, of course, these two levels can never be
entirely separated, and much narrative theory has been concerned to describe
ways in which they interact. Thus Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyreand Joyce’s
‘The Dead’, for example, present the events of the narrative more or less in the
order that they are alleged to have occurred. By contrast, texts such as Emily
Brontë’s Wuthering Heightsand Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’ move for-
ward and backward in time and shift from the level of telling to that of the told
in complex and unnerving ways. Many modernist and postmodernist texts
experiment with the relation between these two levels, to denaturalize or
defamiliarize our sense of how narratives function. A text such as Robert
Coover’s short story ‘The Babysitter’ from Pricksongs and Descants(1969),
for instance, presents several slightly different accounts of what appears to be
the same evening from a number of different perspectives: the contradictions
and dislocations produced within and between these accounts, however,
make it impossible, finally, to determine the precise nature or order of the
evening’s events. Alain Robbe-Grillet’s novels, such as The Voyeur(1955) and
Jealousy(1957), also recount the ‘same’ series of events over and over again,
but from the ‘same’ narratorial perspective: each telling, however, is subtly
different, thus dissolving our sense of any one, true, narrative of events. Rather
than reading such texts simply as exceptions or aberrations, we might
consider ways in which they metafictionally reflect on the multiplicity of
any narrative – its susceptibility to different readings, its differing narrative
perspectives, its shifting senses of place and time.
Everything that we have said about narrative up to this point has concerned
the sense of its linearity: narrative involves a linear series of actions connected
in time and through causality. In addition to this linearity, we might consider
another important aspect of narrative, namely the relation between teller and
listener or reader. Indeed, rather than appealing to the idea of a sequence of
events, Barbara Herrnstein Smith has argued that we need to ground our
understanding of narrative in terms of ‘someone telling someone else that
something happened’ (Smith 1981, 228). The significance of this proposition
is that it redirects our focus from the events or actions themselves to the rela-
tionship between the author or teller and the reader or listener. As Jonathan
Culler has put it, ‘To tell a story is to claim a certain authority, which listeners
grant’ (Culler 1997, 89). Much of the work in narrative theory has involvedNarrative 59
attempts to discriminate among different kinds of narrators (first person or
third person, objective or subjective, reliable or unreliable, so-called ‘omni-
scient’ or not, together with questions concerning his or her ‘point of view’,
his or her ‘voice’ and so on). Our understanding of a text is pervaded by our
sense of the character, trustworthiness and objectivity of the figure who is
narrating. Moreover, it is often very important to discriminate between the
narratorial point of view and that of the so-called implied author – a particu-
larly important distinction in certain ironic texts, for example. Although
Jonathan Swift’s essay ‘A Modest Proposal’ (1729) would not usually be
considered as a narrative, it does provide one of the classic examples of nar-
ratorial irony. In this essay, the narrator proposes that in order to deal with
poverty and hunger in Ireland and to prevent children of the poor from being
a burden to their parents, such children should be sold to the rich as food – a
solution that would be ‘innocent, cheap, easy, and effectual’ (509). The narra-
tor appears to make his proposal seriously but we necessarily conceive of an
‘implied author’ who has very different views and motives, and who is making
a political point about the immorality of the English government in its attitude
towards poverty in Ireland. Our understanding of the ironic force of the text
necessitates a discrimination between the two voices or personae of the
narrator and the implied author.
A consideration of the relationship between teller and listener or reader
leads in turn to questions of power and property. One of the most famous
storytellers is Scheherazade from AThousand and One Nights(a collection of
tales that originated in the Middle East in the ninth–tenth centuries). In these
classical Arabic narratives, Scheherazade has been sentenced to death by the
king but is able to stave off her execution by telling him stories. By ending her
story each night at a particularly exciting point, she is able to delay her death
for another day because the king wants to find out what happens next. What
makes A Thousand and One Nights so intriguing for narrative theorists has
to do with its enactment of forms of power. As Ross Chambers proposes, ‘To
tell a story is to exercise power’ (Chambers 1984, 50). Chambers argues that
storytelling is often used, as in the case of Scheherazade, as an ‘oppositional’
practice, a practice of resistance used by the weak against the strong: ‘opposi-
tional narrative’, he claims, ‘in exploiting the narrative situation, discovers
a power, not to change the essential structure of narrative situations, but to
change its other (the “narratee” if one will), through the achievement and
maintenance of authority, in ways that are potentially radical’ (Chambers
1991, 11). In this respect, we might consider the motives and effects of
Gretta’s story of her dead lover in ‘The Dead’: perhaps the ending of Joyce’s
narrative should be understood in terms of the diffusion of Gabriel’s egoistic,60 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
domineering and even rapacious desire for his wife by Gretta’s narration
of her love story. Gretta, subject to patriarchal society’s insistence on the
husband’s rights to the wife’s body, displaces her husband’s unwanted
attention by telling him a story. The violence of Gabriel’s desire is expressed
in references to his longing ‘to be master of her strange mood...to cry to her
from his soul, to crush her body against him, to overmaster her’ (248). By the
middle of Gretta’s narration, Gabriel sees himself, by contrast with the lover of
her story, as a ‘ludicrous figure...idealizing his own clownish lusts’ and a
‘pitiable fatuous fellow’ (251). And by the end, all lusts and all passions and
anger, all mastery and desire, have dissolved: ‘Gabriel held her hand for a
moment longer, irresolutely, and then shy of intruding on her grief, let it fall
gently and walked quietly to the window’ (253). This conflict of stories –
Gabriel’s about himself and Gretta’s about her dead lover – results in a dis-
turbance of power relations. In this sense, just as much as ‘The Mark on the
Wall’, or the stories of Coover and Robbe-Grillet, ‘The Dead’ is self-reflexively
about the power of stories. More often, of course, it is the dominant ideology
which is able to tell stories about, for example, how it got to be the dominant
ideology. In the Soviet Union, it was the Bolsheviks and later the Stalinists
who got to write the history books. In present-day China, the 1989
Tiananmen Square ‘massacre’ (as it is called in the West) is not in the history
books at all and literary works that attempt to represent it, such as Ma Jian’s
Beijing Coma(2008), are officially banned. At the same time, Chairman Mao
still figures in textbooks as a largely benevolent and wise figure (despite what
are acknowledged in China as his ‘excesses’ and what are generally regarded
in the West as his ‘atrocities’), since his ‘thought’ continues to be the basis
for current doctrine and policy of the ruling Chinese Communist Party (see
http://english.cpc.people.com.cn/66095/4471924.html).
The power exerted by Scheherazade and by Gretta is a specifically
narrativepower. The only way that these storytellers can avoid death on the
one hand and violent passion on the other is by making their stories good, by
making them compelling to the point of distraction. By contrast, as far as the
Soviet Union was concerned, for example, the Stalinist version of history did
not even have to be plausible, because its lessons would be enforced in other
ways. Narrativepower, then, may be the only strategy left for the weak and
dispossessed: without narrative power, they may not be heard. The social and
political importance of stories is eloquently expressed by the old man in
Chinua Achebe’s novel Anthills of the Savannah(1987): ‘The sounding of the
battle-drum is important; the fierce waging of the war itself is important; and
the telling of the story afterwards – each is important in its own way’ (123–4).
But, the man continues, the story is ‘chief among his fellows’:Narrative 61
‘The story is our escort; without it we are blind. Does the blind man own his
escort? No, neither do we the story; rather it is the story that owns us and
directs us. It is the thing that makes us different from cattle; it is the mark on
the face that sets one people apart from their neighbours.’ (124)
Stories own us, and tell us, Achebe suggests, as much as we own or tell stories.
There are many questions of narrative, then, which may be considered
in relation to literature: temporality, linearity and causality, so-called omni-
science, point of view, desire and power. But most of all, perhaps, it is the
relation between narrative and ‘non-’ or ‘anti-narrative’ elements that fascinate
and disturb. Aspects such as description, digression, suspense, aporia and
self-reflection, temporal and causal disorders are often what are most com-
pelling in narrative. A text such as Woolf’s ‘The Mark on the Wall’, indeed, has
no narrative outside of description and aporetic reflections on the nature
of narrative. Correspondingly, Joyce’s ‘The Dead’ depends to a large extent
on moments of what Joyce refers to elsewhere as ‘epiphany’, moments ofrevel-
ation or understanding, moments that appear to stand outside time, outside
of narrative. As Gabriel watches his wife listening to a piece of music as they
prepare to leave the party, there is just such a moment – a moment of revelation
which is also a moment of mystery. Gretta, standing listening to a song is, for
Gabriel, full of ‘grace and mystery...as if she were a symbol of something’
(240). Like Scheherazade’s, Joyce’s storytelling holds off, and hangs on,
death. And as the snow falls on the world outside the hotel window at the
end of the story, as Gabriel falls into unconsciousness and the narrative slips
away, there is another moment of epiphany, a dissolution of time, of space,
of life, of identity, desire and narrative.
Further reading
Wallace Martin, Recent Theories of Narrative (1986), Shlomith Rimmon-
Kenan, Narrative Fiction (2002) and H. Porter Abbott, The Cambridge
Introduction to Narrative (2002) all provide good, clear introductions to
narrative theory, while David Herman, ed., The Cambridge Companion to
Narrative(2007) is a useful collection of clear and helpful accounts of various
dimensions of the topic. See also Herman, Manfred John and Marie-Laure
Ryan, eds, The Routledge Encyclopaedia of Narrative Theory, for a compre-
hensive survey of the field, and Gerald Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology
(2004) for concise accounts of its principal concepts. J. Hillis Miller’s
essay ‘Narrative’ (1990) is a concise and accessible summary of a number of
paradoxes in narrative. Gérard Genette’s Narrative Discourse (1986) is an62 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
influential systematic account of the structure of narrative. Another modern
classic which takes as its focus questions of narrative perspective is Dorrit
Cohn’s Transparent Minds(1978). Peter Brooks’s Reading for the Plot(1984)
explores ways in which narrative may be thought about in relation to readers’
desires; on the ‘epistemophilic urge’ in narrative, see his Body Work(1993). A
good short summary of feminist perspectives on narrative theory is Margaret
Homans’s ‘Feminist Fictions and Feminist Theories of Narrative’ (1994);
see also Lidia Curti, Female Stories, Female Bodies(1998). James Phelan has
collected some useful and provocative essays on narrative and its relationship
to issues of reading in Reading Narrative(1989) and in his more recent co-
edited collection (with Peter Rabinowitz), A Companion to Narrative Theory
(2005). Seymour Chatman’s Coming to Terms(1990) is an incisive summary
of narrative theory in relation to literary texts and film, and is especially
useful in its discussion of ideas of narrative perspective and point of view.
For a critique of traditional narratology from a poststructuralist perspective,
see Andrew Gibson, Towards a Postmodern Theory of Narrative(1996). For a
valuable and wide-ranging collection of essays on narrative theory, from Plato
to Trin Minh-Ha, focusing in particular on ‘classic’ structuralist approaches
and poststructuralist provocations, see Martin McQuillan, ed., The Narrative
Reader(2000).

8. Character
Characters are the life of literature: they are the objects of our curiosity
and fascination, affection and dislike, admiration and condemnation.
Indeed, so intense is our relationship with literary characters that they often
cease to be simply ‘objects’. Through the power of identification, through
sympathy and antipathy, they can become part of how we conceive ourselves,
a part of who we are. More than two thousand years ago, writing about drama
in the Poetics, Aristotle argued that character is ‘secondary’ to what he calls the
‘first essential’ or ‘lifeblood’ of tragedy – the plot – and that characters are
included ‘for the sake of the action’ (Aristotle 1965, 40). Considerably more
recently in an essay on the modern novel, ‘The Art of Fiction’ (1884), the
novelist Henry James asked, ‘What is character but the determination of
incident? What is incident but the illustration of character?’ (James 1986,
174). While Aristotle makes character ‘secondary’ to plot, James suggests that
the two are equal and mutually defining. Indeed, the novels and plays we
respond to most strongly almost invariably have forceful characters as well
as an intriguing plot. Our memory of a particular novel or play often depends
as much on our sense of a particular character as on the ingenuities of the
plot. Characters in books have even become part of our everyday language.
Oedipus, for example, has given his name to a condition fundamental to psy-
choanalytic theory, whereby little boys want to kill their fathers and sleep with
their mothers. Mrs Malaprop in Sheridan’s play The Rivals(1775) has given
us the word ‘malapropism’ when someone uses, for example, the word ‘illiter-
ate’ to mean ‘obliterate’ (see I.2.178). A ‘romeo’ denotes a certain kind of
amorous young man resembling the hero of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet
(c.1595). When we refer to someone as a ‘scrooge’, we mean a miser, but when
we do so we are alluding, knowingly or not, to the protagonist of Charles64 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Dickens’s AChristmas Carol(1843), for whom Christmas is a fatuous waste of
time and money. Vladimir Nabokov’s novel Lolita(1958) has given us a term
for what the OEDdefines as ‘a sexually precocious schoolgirl’, as well as a word
which especially through the Internet has acquired an association with the
sexual abuse of children. There is even a day named after a fictional character,
‘Bloomsday’ (16 June), after Leopold Bloom in James Joyce’s Ulysses(1922).
But what is a person or a character in a literary work? What does it mean to
talk about a character as ‘vivid’ or ‘life like’? How do writers construct char-
acters and produce the illusion of living beings? What is the relationship
between a person in a literary text and a person outside it? As we shall try to
demonstrate, these are questions that books themselves – in particular plays,
novels and short stories – consistently explore. In this chapter, we shall focus,
in particular, on the nineteenth-century realist tradition. It is, we suggest, this
tradition which has culminated in the kinds of assumptions that we often hold
about people and characters today. And it is against such preconceptions
that modernist and postmodernist texts tend to work.
Charles Dickens’s novels are indisputably from the nineteenth century.
Whether or not they can be described as ‘realist’, though, is very definitely a
matter of dispute. But this very uncertainty makes the novels particularly
intriguing for a discussion of character since they tend both to exploit and
to explode ‘realist’ conventions of characterization. Great Expectations
(1860–1) opens with the orphan-hero, Pip, examining the writing on his
parents’ gravestones in order to attempt to determine the ‘character’ of his
mother and father:
As I never saw my father or my mother, and never saw any likeness of either
of them (for their days were long before the days of photographs), my first
fancies regarding what they were like, were unreasonably derived from their
tombstones. The shape of the letters on my father’s, gave me an odd idea
that he was a square, stout, dark man, with curly black hair. From the
character and turn of the inscription, ‘Also Georgiana Wife of the Above’,
I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. (35)
The comedy of this passage is partly produced by the double sense of
‘character’ – as the shape of an inscribed letter on a tombstone and as the
personality of a human being. The text implies that our knowledge of people
is determined by writing, by the character of written words. Although he is
‘unreasonable’, in taking the shape of letters to denote character, Pip is not
simply mistaken in recognizing that our sense of our self and of other people is
developed through language. For as this passage clearly indicates, we construct
ourselves through and in words, in the image-making, story-generating
power of language. In this respect, it is significant that the opening to GreatCharacter 65
Expectationsexplores one of the major themes of literary texts: the question
‘Who am I?’ One fascination of characters in fiction and drama, as well as one
of their most ‘characteristic’ activities, is to suggest answers to this question,
not only for themselves, but also for us.
To talk about a novel such as Great Expectationsas ‘realist’ is in part to sug-
gest that its characters are ‘lifelike’, that they are like ‘real’ people. But what
does this mean? The first requirement for such a character is to have a plaus-
ible name and to say and do things that seem convincingly like the kinds of
things people say and do in so-called ‘real life’. The second requirement is
a certain complexity. Without this complexity, a character appears merely
‘one-dimensional’, cardboard or (in E.M. Forster’s terms) ‘flat’ (Forster 1976,
73). To be lifelike, a fictional character should have a number of different
traits – traits or qualities which may be conflicting or contradictory: he or
she should be, to some extent, unpredictable, his or her words and actions
should appear to originate in multiple impulses. Thirdly, however, these
tensions, contradictions, multiplicities should cohere in a single identity.
Thus ‘lifelikeness’ appears to involve both multiplicity and unity at the same
time. In the classic nineteenth-century realist novel Middlemarch (1871–
2), for example, there is a character called Lydgate of whom George Eliot
observes: ‘He had two selves within him’, but these selves must ‘learn to
accommodate each other’ in a ‘persistent self’ (182). It is this tension, between
complexity and unity, that makes a character like Lydgate both interesting
and credible. The importance of such unity in realist texts is made clear by
works like Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr
Hyde(1886) or, less melodramatically, Joseph Conrad’s ‘The Secret Sharer’
(1910): these narratives can be called ‘limit texts’ in that they use the frame-
work of life like or realistic characters to explore what happens when the self is
demonically split or doubled. In doing so, such texts challenge the basis of
realism itself.
Realist characterization presupposes a ‘mimetic’ model of literary texts
whereby what is primary or original is a real person, and a character in a book
is simply a copy of such a person. Such a model does not allow for a reversal
of this relationship: it does not allow for the possibility that, for example, a
person in ‘real life’ might be convincing to the extent that he or she resembles
a person in a book. On the face of it, such a reversal may sound rather strange
or counter-intuitive: we would normally want to give priority to a ‘person’ and
say that characters in books are more or less like ‘real’ people. In fact, however,
as the example of Great Expectationssuggests, it is easy to demonstrate that
things also work the other way round. Indeed, literary history contains vari-
ous dramatic instances where ‘life’ copies fiction. After the publication of
Goethe’s The Sorrows of Young Werther in Germany in 1774, for example,66 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
there was a fashion among young men in Europe for suicide, an act modelled
on the suicide of the eponymous hero of that novel. Similarly, J.D. Salinger’s
novel The Catcher in the Rye(1951) was held responsible for the antisocial
behaviour of numerous young men in the United States in the 1950s and early
1960s who identified with the disaffected hero Holden Caulfield. The young,
in fact, are often considered (by the old) to be in danger of mimetic dissipation,
to endanger themselves, their families and society because they identify with
and then copy the actions and attitudes of disreputable people in books or,
more recently, in films, on TV, in videos or computer games.
This paradox of character whereby people in books are like ‘real’ people
who are, in turn, like people in books, is suggested by the words ‘person’ and
‘character’ themselves. We have been using these words more or less inter-
changeably, though with an implicit and conventional emphasis on the
‘reality’ of a person and the ‘fictionality’ of a character. But the words are worth
examining in more detail. According to Chambers Dictionary, ‘person’
signifies both ‘a living soul or self-conscious being’ and ‘a character repres-
ented, as on the stage’. Indeed, ‘person’ goes back to the Latin word persona,
the mask worn by an actor in a play on the classical stage. The English language
uses the word ‘persona’ to signify a kind of mask or disguise, a pretended or
assumed character. The word ‘person’, then, is bound up with questions of
fictionality, disguise, representation and mask. To know a person, or to know
who a person is, involves understanding a mask. In this respect, the notion of
person is inseparable from the literary. This is not to say that ‘real’ people are
actually fictional. Rather it is to suggest that there is a complex, destabilizing
and perhaps finally undecidable interweaving of the ‘real’ and the ‘fictional’:
our lives, our reallives, are governed and directed by the stories we read, write
and tell ourselves.
There is a similar enigma about the word ‘character’: just as the word ‘per-
son’ has a double and paradoxical signification, so ‘character’ means both
a letter or sign, a mark of writing, and the ‘essential’ qualities of a ‘person’.
Again, the etymology of the word is suggestive: from the Greek word kharat-
tein, to engrave, the word becomes a mark or sign, a person’s title and hence a
distinguishing mark – that which distinguishes one person from another – and
from this a ‘fictional’ person or a person on stage. Pip’s characterological read-
ing ofhis parents’ tombstones, then, is perhaps not so far off the mark. And in
Hamlet, when Polonius tells his son Laertes that he should remember his
‘precepts’ or advice, he plays on this double sense, using ‘character’ as a verb:
‘And these few precepts in thy memory / Look thou character’ (I.iii.58–9). In
this way, Shakespeare’s play suggests how intimately ‘character’ is bound up
with inscription, with signs, with writing.Character 67
We have argued that the realist novel tends to rely on a particular con-
ception of what a person is – that a person is a complex but unified whole. We
might develop this further by suggesting that the realist model of character
involves a fundamental dualism of inside (mind, soul or self) and outside
(body, face and other external features). The ‘inside’ that we associate with
being human has many different forms. In the nineteenth century this was
often described in terms of‘spiritual life’ or ‘soul’. More recently, it has just as
often (and perhaps more helpfully) been understood in terms of the uncon-
scious. The following extracts from the first paragraph of George Eliot’s novel
Middlemarchwill allow us to explore this in more detail:
Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into relief
by poor dress. Her hand and wrist were so finely formed that she could wear
sleeves not less bare of style than those in which the Blessed Virgin
appeared to Italian painters; and her profile as well as her stature and bear-
ing seemed to gain the more dignity from her plain garments, which by the
side of provincial fashion gave her the impressiveness of a fine quotation
from the Bible, – or from one of our elder poets, – in a paragraph from
today’s newspaper. She was usually spoken of as being remarkably clever,
but with the addition that her sister Celia had more common-sense.
Nevertheless, Celia wore scarcely more trimmings; and it was only to close
observers that her dress differed from her sister’s, and had a shade of
coquetry in its arrangements; for Miss Brooke’s plain dressing was due to
mixed conditions, in most of which her sister shared. The pride of being
ladies had something to do with it: the Brooke connections, though not
exactly aristocratic, were unquestionably ‘good’ [...] Young women of
such birth, living in a quiet country-house, and attending a village church
hardly larger than a parlour, naturally regarded frippery as the ambition
of a huckster’s daughter. Then there was well-bred economy, which in
those days made show in dress the first item to be deducted from, when any
margin was required for expenses more distinctive of rank. Such reasons
would have been enough to account for plain dress, quite apart from reli-
gious feeling; but in Miss Brooke’s case, religion alone would have deter-
mined it [...] and to her the destinies of mankind, seen by the light of
Christianity, made the solicitudes of feminine fashion appear an occupation
for Bedlam. She could not reconcile the anxieties of a spiritual life involving
eternal consequences, with a keen interest in guimp and artificial protru-
sions of drapery. [...] (29–30)
This extraordinary opening paragraph, with its ironic insistence on the
importance of clothes despite Dorothea Brooke’s spiritual aspirations, clearly
acknowledges that physical appearance (outside) works as a sign of character68 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
(inside). What is indicated here is an opposition that is fundamental in realist
texts: that there is an inside and an outside to a person, that these are separate,
but that one may be understood to have a crucial influence on the other.
The opening to Middlemarchconcentrates almost obsessively on Dorothea’s
clothes because it is her clothes that allow us insight into her character. As this
suggests, another convention of characterological realism is that character is
hidden or obscure, that in order to know another person – let alone ourselves
– we must decipher the outer appearance. Eliot constantly manipulates and
plays with the mechanisms of such realism, above all with that form of tele-
pathy or mind-reading whereby a narrator can describe a character from the
outside but can also know (and keep secrets about) that character’s inner
thoughts and feelings, conscious or unconscious. At the same time, by evok-
ing Dorothea’s appearance in terms of how ‘the Blessed Virgin appeared to
Italian painters’ and by comparing her ‘plain garments’ to ‘the impressiveness
of a fine quotation’, Eliot subtly foregrounds a sense of the painterly and the
textual. We are drawn and caught up in intriguing uncertainties about where
representation (a picture or text) begins or ends.
From Dorothea’s clothes, then, Eliot weaves a fine and intricate web of
character – in terms of the familial, social and political, and in terms of the
moral and religious. Indeed, one of the most striking sentences of the excerpt
focuses ironically on this concern with clothes: ‘She could not reconcile the
anxieties of a spiritual life involving eternal consequences, with a keen interest
in guimp and artificial protrusions of drapery.’ The passage as a whole makes
it clear, however, that Dorothea’s puritan plainness is simply the reverse
side of a ‘keen interest in guimp’. Her preference for ‘plain dressing’ is itself a
complex and considered statement of fashion. It is at this point, in particular,
that Eliot’s ironic presentation of Dorothea involves a subtle questioning of
the conventional opposition between a ‘spiritual life’ on the one hand and
the ‘artificial protrusions of drapery’ on the other. The passage suggests that
this opposition is itself artificial, that whatever people ‘really’ are cannot be
separated from how they appear. It suggests that people are constituted by an
interplay of inner and outer, but that it is not a question of one being the truth
and the other mere surface. So while realist conventions of character may rely
on the opposition between inner and outer, mind or spirit and body, and so
on, Eliot’s description of Dorothea also shows how this opposition can be
questioned from within the realist tradition itself.
This brings us to one of the central questions raised by many novels:
How can we know a person? As we have seen, realist novels such as George
Eliot’s attempt to answer this question by presenting people as knowable by
a number of ‘outward’ signs of ‘inner’ worth. Appearances, however, can beCharacter 69
deceptive. Indeed, many novels and plays are concerned with the problem
of deception or disguise, with discriminating between an appearance that
is a true sign of inner value and one that is not. The realist tradition often relies
on the possibility of such deception, while also presupposing the possibility of
finally discovering the worth or value of a person by reading the outward signs.
The exposure, despite appearances, of Bulstrode’s hypocrisy, for example,
and the final validation of Lydgate’s good character are central to the plot of
Middlemarch. But the fact that a ‘person’ is itself, in some sense, a ‘mask’,
means that even if we think we ‘know’ the soul or self of a person, his or her true
identity, there is always a possibility, even if that person is ourself, that such an
identity is itself a form of mask. This irreducible uncertainty may partly
account for realism’s obsessive concern with the question: ‘Who am I?’
The stories of Raymond Carver (1938–88), like many so-called post-
modern texts, relentlessly play with such conventions of characterological
construction and perception. In ‘Cathedral’ (1983), for example, the some-
what obtuse, belligerent, intolerant, discriminatory narrator finds it both
comic and unnerving to think about how a blind man, a friend of his wife
who has come to visit, looks – even while (or because) he cannot look. The
narrator is struck by the fact that the blind man does not wear dark glasses.
This disturbs him, since although at first sight the blind man’s eyes ‘looked
like anyone else’s eyes’, on closer inspection (and the narrator takes the oppor-
tunity for a lengthy session of unreciprocable inspection) they seem ‘creepy’:
‘As I stared at his face, I saw the left pupil turn in toward his nose while the
other made an effort to keep in one place. But it was only an effort, for that eye
was on the roam without his knowing it or wanting it to be’ (297). The story
culminates in a dope-smoking session in which the blind man teaches the
narrator the advantages of drawing with closed eyes, of the necessary visual
imagination of the blind. On one level, the story performs a conventional
reversal of the blind and the seeing, figuring the blind man as the seer. But on
another level, Carver explores conventions of characterological construction
by querying the equation of the look of someone with their identity (the eyes,
conventionally the most telling indicator of character are, for our view of the
blind man, just ‘creepy’ signifiers of mechanical dysfunction, disconnected
from intention, emotion, will), and by prompting an awareness that in this
story it is the one who is notseen – either by us as readers or by the blind man
– who most fully exposes himself, exposes his ‘character’, in all its belliger-
ence, intolerance and obtuseness.
As we have seen, it is difficult in an absolute sense to separate real from
fictional characters. To read about a character is to imagine and create a char-
acter in reading: it is to create a person. And as we have tried to show, reading70 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
characters involves learning to acknowledge that a person can never finally
be singular – that there is always multiplicity, ambiguity, otherness and uncon-
sciousness. Our final point concerns what it means to ‘identify’ with charac-
ters in fiction. It seems difficult, if not impossible, to enjoy a novel or play
without, at some level, identifying with the characters in it. In fact, the most
obvious definition of the ‘hero’ or ‘heroine’ of a novel or play would be the
person with whom we ‘identify’, with whom we sympathize or empathize, or
whose position or role we imaginatively inhabit. The anti-hero, by contrast,
is the character with whom we might identify, but only in wilful resistance to
prevailing codes of morality and behaviour. ‘Identification’ in any case is never
as simple as we might think. To identify with a person in a novel or play is to
identify oneself, to produce an identity for oneself. It is to give oneself a world
of fictional people, to start to let one’s identity merge with that of a fiction. It is,
finally, also to create a character for oneself, to create oneself as a character.
Further reading
A good place to start in thinking more about literary character is Uri Margolis’s
lucid cognitive-psychological essay ‘Character’ (2007). For an alternative
and reasonably accessible account, see Harold Bloom, ‘The Analysis of
Character’ (1990). A classic if somewhat reductive account of character
may be found in Chapters 3 and 4 of Forster’s Aspects of theNovel(1976), first
published in 1927. For a good discussion of character in the nineteenth- and
early twentieth-century novel, see Martin Price, Formsof Life(1983). A very
different and more challenging approach is Thomas Docherty’s Reading
(Absent) Character(1983), which focuses in particular on the nouveau roman
and postmodern writing generally, in order to move beyond a ‘mimetic’ theory
of character to one in which characterization is seen as ‘a process of reading
and writing’. For an excellent, if difficult, argument for the deconstruction of
character which challenges the humanist perspective of a unified self and
argues for ‘an esthetic and ethic of the fragmented self’, see Leo Bersani’s
important book A Future for Astyanax: Character and Desire in Literature
(1978); see also Hélène Cixous’s ‘The Character of “Character” ’ (1974).
J. Hillis Miller’s chapter on ‘Character’ in Ariadne’s Thread(1992) brilliantly
weaves literary with critical, theoretical and philosophical reflections on
character. On the question of identification in psychoanalysis and literature,
see Diana Fuss, Identification Papers(1995).

9. Voice
Nothing is stranger, or more familiar, than the idea of a voice. In George
Eliot’s Daniel Deronda (1876), a character called Mrs Meyrick ob-
serves that ‘A mother hears something like a lisp in her children’s talk to the
very last’ (423). In Shakespeare’s King Lear(1605), the blinded Gloucester
recognizes Lear from his voice: ‘The trick of that voice I do well remember;
/ Is’t not the King?’ (IV, vi, 106–7). In both of these examples we have what
appear to be confirmations of the persistence of identity, expressed in the
singular or peculiar nature (the ‘trick’) of a person’s voice. But in each of these
exchanges we are also presented with a kind of strangeness as well: in the con-
text of Eliot’s novel, for example, we may reflect on the irony of the fact that
what the mother recognizes in her children, what it is in their voice that
confirms the persistence of their identity, is something that cannot be heard,
a lisp perceived only by the mother. Moreover, there is something strange in
the idea that an adult’s speech should be, in a dream like or hallucinatory fash-
ion, haunted by the past in this way. In the example from Shakespeare, on the
other hand, it is difficult for us not to be aware of the terrible precariousness of
recognition and, by implication, of identity: Gloucester may believe that he
recognizes, and may indeed recognize, the trick of the king’s voice, but we are
all too aware of the fact that he can never again seethe king, never confirm the
king’s identity by sight. And ironically, Gloucester is only reunited with Lear
thanks to help from his son Edgar, whose voice (disguised as Tom o’ Bedlam)
Gloucester failsto recognize.
The examples from Eliot and Shakespeare appear, at least initially, to
be about the familiarity and individuality of voice. But like literary texts
more generally, they are also concerned with the ways in which a voice may
be strange and disturbing. We may enjoy a novel like Raymond Chandler’s72 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The Little Sister(1949) partly on account of the distinctive, gritty, cinemato-
graphic voice-over of Marlowe the narrator, but one of the things that makes
this novel haunting and powerful, as well as comical, is its sensitivity to the
strangeness of voices. Thus, for example, we have Miss Mavis Weld, apparently
concerned about her brother: ‘She clutched her bag to her bosom with tight
little fingers. “You mean something has happened to him?” Her voice faded
off into a sort of sad whisper, like a mortician asking for a down payment’ (39).
Or we have Marlowe recounting a phone call: ‘The phone rang before I had
quite started to worry about Mr Lester B. Clausen. I reached for it absently.
The voice I heard was an abrupt voice, but thick and clogged, as if it was being
strained through a curtain or somebody’s long white beard’ (41).
The power of a voice is made dramatically clear by the British govern-
ment’s censorship of the Sinn Fein leader, Gerry Adams: for a number of
years (until September 1994) his voice was, in effect, illegal. His words, when
broadcast, had to be spoken by an actor. Few voices could be said to have
haunted the British media at that time as forcefully as Gerry Adams’s. But
a concern with what is powerful, haunting and strange about voices is hardly
a recent phenomenon. One need only think of the importance of oracles,
and the intimate links between voice and prophecy in the Bible and other clas-
sical texts. Consider, for instance, the voice that announces in I Corinthians
13: ‘Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. / And though I
have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge;
and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity, I am nothing’ (1–2). Or think of the apocalyptic voices at the end of
the Bible, in the Book of Revelation – for example of the angel who comes
down from heaven, whose ‘face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars
of fire’ and who
cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried,
seven thunders uttered their voices.
And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about
to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those
things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. (Rev. 10:
3–4)
In both of these biblical quotations voice is described in terms that identify
it with the non-human – with musical instruments (sounding brass or tinkling
cymbal), with the sound of a lion or with the sound of thunder. It is also pre-
sented in terms of multiplicity (speaking in tongues, the voices of the sevenVoice 73
thunders) and of uncanniness (the voice that has the gift of prophecy and is
apparently omniscient; the voice that is forbidden, that must be sealed up). All
of these characteristics are important for thinking about literary texts more
generally. Literature, in fact, might be defined as being the space in which,
more than anywhere else, the power, beauty and strangeness of the voice is
both evoked or bodied forth anddescribed, talked about, analysed. In this
respect, reading literary texts involves attending to extraordinary voices.
One of the most obvious extremes of voice in literature is in relation to
music – in other words, the idea that voice becomes pure sound, turns into
music. Here we may recall Walter Pater’s proposition that ‘all art constantly
aspires towards the condition of music’ (Pater, 111): this is as much true of the
‘smoky kind of voice’ (202) whose singing transfixes and transforms the life of
the narrator in Jean Rhys’s story ‘Let Them Call It Jazz’ (1962) as it is of the
glozing, serpentine voice that seduces Eve in Milton’s Paradise Lost(Book IX,
532ff.), or of the song of the skylark or of the nightingale to which Shelley and
Keats respectively aspire in their great song-like odes. At the same time, how-
ever, we are all perfectly aware that literary texts are not(simply) music or song.
Part of what makes texts literary is indeed their peculiar, paradoxical relation
to music (not least in lyric poems and ballads, originally performed with or as
music). That is to say, poems or short stories or other texts may aspire towards
the condition of music, but they are necessarily stuck in their so-called
linguistic predicament. Thus Coleridge’s ‘Kubla Khan’ (1798) is concerned
with the demonic power of music played by ‘A damsel with a dulcimer’ and
with the paradoxical desire to ‘build’ the very things that the poem has
described (a pleasure-dome and caves of ice) ‘with music’:
A damsel with a dulcimer
In a vision once I saw:
It was an Abyssinian maid,
And on her dulcimer she played,
Singing of Mount Abora.
Could I revive within me
Her symphony and song,
To such a deep delight ’twould win me,
That with music loud and long,
I would build that dome in air,
That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
In Shelley’s ode ‘To a Sky-Lark’ (1820), on the other hand, the speaker
ends by implying that he is unteachable:74 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Teach me half the gladness
That thy brain must know,
Such harmonious madness
From my lips would flow
The world should listen then –as I am listening now.
Shelley’s ode thus aspires to the ‘harmonious madness’ it can never voice.
Similarly, Keats’s ode of 1819 can acknowledge the ‘ecstasy’ of the night-
ingale’s ‘voice’, but the speaker also recognizes that he can never triumph in
the desire to ‘dissolve’ his identity with that voice. Being stuck, in this respect,
is no doubt a fundamental condition of literature. Not surprisingly then,
literary texts call to be thought about not only in terms of how they body forth
voices but also in terms of how they reflect, comment on and analyse what
‘voice’ means. As Eve’s temptation by the snaky sibilants of Satan suggests,
in Milton’s Paradise Lost, a voice can be astonishingly seductive. Interest-
ingly, a voice can become even moreseductive by referring to the fact that it is
being seductive. (The contemporary commercial success of phone-sex may
also testify to this.) Voice seduces: as the etymology of seduction may suggest
(se-, aside, ducere, to lead), it leads us aside or draws us away.
What does it mean to talk about voice in relation to literary texts? Take the
opening of a short story by Raymond Carver, entitled ‘Fat’ (1963). It begins:
I am sitting over coffee and cigarettes at my friend Rita’s and I am telling her
about it.
Here is what I tell her.
It is late of a slow Wednesday when Herb seats the fat man at my station.
This fat man is the fattest person I have ever seen, though he is neat-
appearing and well dressed enough. Everything about him is big. But it
is the fingers I remember best. When I stop at the table near his to see to
the old couple, I first notice the fingers. They look three times the size of a
normal person’s fingers – long, thick, creamy fingers. (64)
This is, in some ways at least, a descriptively straightforward opening. But
once we reflect on it, we find that it is doing many different and quite sophist-
icated things. The first point to observe is that this is a first person narration
with a strong sense of a speaking voice: we are drawn away by what we might
call the ‘reality effect’ of a speaking voice that is produced in part through the
conversational language – the lexical items and syntax, the topic, use of the
present tense, repetition – and in part through the explicit reference to the fact
that the narrator is speaking and ‘telling’ us something. The opening sentences,
in a quite subtle way, put the reader in the position of the narrator’s friend RitaVoice 75
(‘I am telling her...Here is what I tell...’). Despite the seductively ‘realistic’
or ‘everyday’ quality of voice here, something fairly complex is going on: we
are presented with a narrator who, even in the apparently straightforward lan-
guage of the opening two sentences, makes it clear that this is a self-referential
or metafictional story, a story that is at least at some level a story aboutstory-
telling. The seductiveness of an apparently casual speaking voice tends to
distract attention from this dimension of the text. Moreover, without really
drawing attention to the fact, we have up till now been referring to the ‘I’ of the
story as the narrator. In other words, we have been making an implicit distinc-
tion between narrator and author. This is a first-person narration and the nar-
rator, we quickly learn, is a waitress. What we are being presented with, in
other words, is the ‘voice’ of a girl or young woman. At the same time, how-
ever, there is a sort of double-voicing here to the extent that we may recognize
this text as being characteristic of Raymond Carver’s work. In this respect, we
could say, there is also the phantasmatic voice of Carver lurking in these lines.
We hear the ‘voice’ of Carver in a figurative, ghostly sense (like a signature
tune).
Rather differently, there is Thomas Hardy’s poem, ‘The Voice’:
Woman much missed, how you call to me, call to me,
Saying that now you are not as you were
When you had changed from the one who was all to me,
But as at first, when our day was fair.
Can it be you that I hear? Let me view you, then,
Standing as when I drew near to the town
Where you would wait for me: yes, as I knew you then,
Even to the original air-blue gown!
Or is it only the breeze, in its listlessness
Travelling across the wet mead to me here,
You being ever dissolved to wan wistlessness,
Heard no more again far or near?
Thus I; faltering forward,
Leaves around me failing,
Wind oozing thin through the thorn from norward,
And the woman calling.
Written in December 1912, ‘The Voice’ belongs to the series of so-called
‘1912–13 poems’ that Hardy wrote following his first wife’s death. (Emma76 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Hardy died in the preceding month, November 1912.) It is difficult, in other
words, not to read this poem as autobiographical – to understand it as a poem
about the poet’s experience of mourning following his wife’s death. But the
poem is more than simply autobiographical: it is about the radical uncertainty
of human identity and experience, their faltering. ‘The Voice’ not only
describes the uncanny experience of hearing a dead person’s voice but in
some sense transfers the call to us in turn. The poem functions as a kind of
strange textual switchboard. Again, we can respond to the poem in quite
straightforward terms – it is a poem about someone who is out walking in
an autumn or early winter landscape and who thinks he hears the voice of a
woman whom he once loved (who was ‘all’ to him) but who is no longer above
ground (‘heard no more again far or near’). As its title suggests then, it is about
‘the voice’ he hears. But it is also a poem about voice more generally, and about
the relationship between poetry and hearing a woman’s call. (This may in turn
recall the notion of inspiration in classical Greek and Roman times, in other
words, hearing the voice, music or song of a female Muse or Muses.) This is
evident, for example, in the opening line: ‘Woman much missed, how you call
to me, call to me’. What we are presented with here is an affirmation of the
spooky actuality of hearing a dead woman’s voice – an affirmation which
the poem proceeds to question (‘Can it be you that I hear?’), but which it
concludes by reaffirming (‘Thus I; faltering forward...And the woman
calling’). This opening line, however, is at the same time grammatically
ambiguous: ‘how’ suggests a questioning as well as an exclamation. ‘Call to
me, call to me’, on the other hand, can be read as an echo (as twovoices, even
if the second is a double of the first) or as changing from an exclamation – ‘how
you call to me’ – to a demand or appeal: ‘call to me’.
The ending of the poem suggests either that the speaker is off his head,
hearing voices, or that the dead really do come back and it is indeed possible
to hear voices from beyond the grave. But it also suggests something about
literary texts in general. Every one of the writers who has been discussed in
this chapter is dead. But as we indicate in our discussion of the ‘death of the
author’ (in Chapter 3), every literary text can be thought of as involving a voice
from beyond the grave, since every text is at least potentially capable of outliv-
ing the person who originally gives voice to it. The woman in Hardy’s poem
is in this respect a figure of the poet par excellence. Do we hear Hardy’s voice
in ‘The Voice’ or not? Or – to reflect on the poem in a quite different way
altogether, that is to say in the light of what Harold Bloom calls ‘the anxiety
of influence’ – do we perhaps hear Keats’s voice in this poem? Bloom’s cele-
brated theory (Bloom 1973) is that what impels poets to write is not so much
the desire to reflect on the world as the desire to respond to and to challengeVoice 77
the voices of the dead. For Bloom, any ‘strong’ poem will always involve
an encounter between the ‘living’ poet – in this case Hardy – and the dead – in
this case perhaps most obviously Keats, whose ‘Ode to a Nightingale’ is also
explicitly concerned with the ‘dissolving’ qualities of voice and identity. From
a Bloomian perspective, Hardy’s reference to ‘You being ever dissolved to wan
wistlessness’ might be read not so much as an address to the poet’s dead wife
(strange enough as that gesture may itself seem) but rather as an eerie and
ambivalent ‘revisitation’ ofKeats’s lines:
That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
And with thee fade away into the forest dim:
Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
What thou amongst the leaves hast never known...
Keats’s voice might, in this sense, be said to haunt ‘The Voice’ as much as it
does other Hardy poems, such as ‘The Darkling Thrush’ (1900) – the very
title of which explicitly refers us to Keats’s ode (‘Darkling I listen...’).
In poems such as ‘The Voice’ and ‘The Darkling Thrush’, in other words,
we can recognize the ‘trick’ of Hardy’s voice in terms of an idiomatic tone
(lugubrious, plaintive, ironic etc.) and idiomatic rhymes and neologisms
(‘listlessness’, ‘wistlessness’). But this is ‘voice’ in a figurative, ghostly sense.
Moreover, it is ‘voice’ as plural – haunted by, for example, the voice or voices
of other poets such as Keats.
The examples of Carver and Hardy are helpful because they highlight a
number of important ideas for thinking about voice in relation to literature.
First they suggest that the question of voice is never simple, even (or perhaps
especially) when it appears to be. Second, and more specifically, they suggest
that literary texts not only presentvoices but also have things to say aboutwhat
voices are and how we might or might not hear them. Third, there is invariably
more than one voice in a literary text, even if it is a matter of a voice ostensibly
just talking or responding to itself.
This final point can be thought about further in at least two ways. On the
one hand – and this has been an important feature of recent literary theoretical
concerns – there is the importance of seeing literature as a space in which one
encounters multiple voices. Literary texts call upon us to think about them
in terms of many voices – for instance, in terms of what M.M. Bakhtin calls
heteroglossiaor of what he, Julia Kristeva, Roland Barthes and others refer to
as polyphony. Literature is, as Salman Rushdie has observed, ‘the one place in
any society where, within the secrecy of our own heads, we can hear voices
talking about everything in every possible way’ (Rushdie 1990, 16). Saleem,78 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the narrator of Rushdie’s novel Midnight’s Children (1981), is an excellent
example: he is telepathic, like every so-called omniscient narrator in a work
of fiction, and he is continually hearing multiple voices. As he remarks: ‘I
was a radio receiver, and could turn the volume down or up; I could select
individual voices; I could even, by an effort of will, switch off my newly-
discovered inner ear’ (164).
On the other hand – and this has been a related and similarly important
feature of recent critical and theoretical concerns – literature encourages us to
think about the idea that there may in fact be no such thing as avoice, a single,
unified voice (whether that of an author, a narrator, a reader or anyone else).
Rather, there is difference and multiplicity withinevery voice. There is, then,
not only the kind of socio-literary polyphony that Bakhtin describes, and
which he illustrates for example by looking at the way Dickens orchestrates,
inhabits and detaches himself from the role of various speakers in his novel
Little Dorrit(Bakhtin 1992, 203–5). But in addition to this, and more funda-
mentally, any one voice is in fact made up of multiple voices. There is differ-
ence and polyphony within every voice. We have tried to suggest this by
looking at some of the ways in which the voice of an author or poet is always a
sort of ghostly site for a gathering of voices. We might conclude, then, with a
thought proffered in one of the ‘Adagia’ (or ‘aphorisms’) of the poet Wallace
Stevens: ‘When the mind is like a hall in which thought is like a voice speaking,
the voice is always that of someone else’ (168).
Further reading
For two traditional but in some respects still stimulating accounts of voice
and literature, see Yvor Winters, ‘The Audible Reading of Poetry’ (1957),
and Francis Berry, Poetry and the Physical Voice(1962). A more recent and
theoretically informed account is provided by Furniss and Bath (1996),
in their chapter on ‘Hearing Voices in Poetic Texts’. Roland Barthes has
very engaging, thought-provoking things to say about voice, for example in
S/Z (Barthes 1990b). On heteroglossia, see M.M. Bakhtin, The Dialogic
Imagination(1981). For Kristeva and polyphony, see for example the essay
‘Word, Dialogue and Novel’ (Kristeva 1986). For a challenging but compelling
account of the strangeness of the narrator’s ‘I’ in a literary text, see Maurice
Blanchot’s ‘The Narrative Voice’ (Blanchot 1981). On voice in relation to
print and reading, see Griffiths, The Printed Voice of Victorian Poetry(1989).
On poetry, voice and hearing, see Geoffrey Hartman’s eclectic and stimulating
essay, ‘Words and Wounds’ (Hartman 1981), and, for a more technical,
difficult but fascinating study, see Garrett Stewart’s Reading Voices (1990).Voice 79
Steven Connor’s remarkable study Dumbstruck – A Cultural History of
Ventriloquism(2000) offers a wide-ranging account of voice especially in rela-
tion to spiritualism and teletechnology. The philosopher David Appelbaum’s
Voice(1990) is a brilliant and idiosyncratic study of such dimensions of ‘voice’
as the cough, laugh, breath and babble. Oliver Sacks’s Seeing Voices(1991) is
a thought-provoking exploration specifically in the context of deafness, while
Wesling and Slawek’s Literary Voice(1995) draws on philosophy, linguistics
and other disciplines to defend literary voice against ‘modern philosophy’s
critique of the spoken’. Finally, from a specifically psychoanalytic perspective,
see Mladen Dolar’s essay ‘The Object Voice’ (1996).

10. Figures and tropes
It’s not for nothing that some still call Elvis Presley ‘The King’ and Eric
Clapton ‘God’. But the force of these acts of renaming depends on the
assumption that no one takes them literally. We take it that no one ever sup-
posed that the United States had become a monarchy and put Elvis Presley on
the throne. No one, not even the most loyal of fans, even in his heyday, believed
that Eric Clapton created the world in six days and rested on the seventh.
They may have believed that his guitar-playing was transplendent, but even
those whose judgement was blurred by an unholy mixture of illegal substances
and Clapton’s heavenly guitar solos are unlikely to have taken him for the
Almighty Himself. These renamings of Presley and Clapton, then, involve the
kind of exaggeration or verbal extravagance known as hyperbole. By the same
token, few are likely to take as gospel the theologically unorthodox if slightly
more credible statement in Pink’s 2004 hit single, that ‘God is a DJ’ (‘If God is
a DJ / Life is a dance floor / Love is the rhythm / You are the music’). To refer
to Elvis as ‘The King’ or Clapton as ‘God’, or to talk in turn about God as a DJ,
is to use figurative language.
Literary language is sometimes thought about in terms of its deviations
from or distortions of ordinary language. Like many generalizations, this idea
is both useful and misleading. It suggests that literary texts are characterized
by the use of figures of speech or tropes, conceiving these as basically synony-
mous – in other words, as deviations from ‘ordinary’ or ‘literal’ language. Thus
Chambers Dictionary defines a rhetorical figure as ‘a deviation from the
ordinary mode of expression’, and trope as ‘a figure of speech, properly one in
which a word or expression is used in other than its literal sense’. Such figures
include, for example, hyperbole, metaphor, metonymy and anthropomor-
phism. Metaphor is the general term for the figure of resemblance, wherebyFigures and tropes 81
one thing is likened to another. Metonymy is a general term for the figure
of association or contiguity, whereby one thing is talked about by referring
to something associated with it. Anthropomorphism is the general term used
to refer to the non-human as if it were human. So-called ‘ordinary’ language,
by contrast, is thought to use far more literal language, language that calls a
spade a spade.
As the examples of Presley, Clapton and Pink suggest, however, the figura-
tive is by no means restricted to literary texts: rather, it saturates all language.
Friedrich Nietzsche famously argued that even truth itself is figurative. In his
essay ‘On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense’ (1873), Nietzsche asks
‘What, then, is truth?’ and offers the following answer:
A mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms – in
short, a sum of human relations, which have been enhanced, transposed,
and embellished poetically and rhetorically, and which after long use seem
firm, canonical, and obligatory to a people: truths are illusions about which
one has forgotten that this is what they are; metaphors which are worn out
and without sensuous power; coins which have lost their pictures and now
matter only as metal, no longer as coins. (Nietzsche 1980, 46–7)
When we think that we speak ‘truthfully’, without the distortions of figuration,
Nietzsche suggests, we only deceive ourselves. The language of truth, lan-
guage supposedly purified of figures and tropes, is simply language to which
we have become so habituated that we no longer recognize it as figurative.
This suggests that our world is constituted figuratively, that we relate to our-
selves, to other people, to the world, through figures of speech. The mani-
pulation and exploitation of figurative language may therefore be understood
to have fundamental implications for the political, social, even economic
constitution of our world. The very way that we understand the world may be
said to be mediated by the kinds of figures that we use to speak about it. We
could think about this in terms of any everyday aspect (aspect is a visual
metaphor) of life – for example, the names of newspapers, those ‘organs’ (a
metaphor) that help to organize(the same organic metaphor) our world: the
Herald, Guardian, Sun, Mirror, Telegraph, Tribuneand so on. While such
discourses as history, philosophy, psychology, economics and so on may,
at least in principle, attempt to rid themselves of figurative language, it is pre-
cisely figuration which is, unavoidably, at the heart of the discipline of literary
studies. This unavoidability is suggested in the passage from Nietzsche, with
its concluding figuration of metaphors as coins. Nietzsche explicitly relies on
the figurative to demystify language and thus to formulate a definition of the
truth. As Paul de Man remarks, tropes are not ‘a derived, marginal, or aberrant82 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
form of language but the linguistic paradigm par excellence’: figurative
language ‘characterizes language as such’ (de Man 1979, 105).
Central to literary criticism and theory, then, are such questions as: What
are the effects of rhetorical figures in literary texts? What purpose do they
serve? And how do they function? One of the most common misconceptions
about literary texts is that their figurative language is simply decorative, some-
thing added to the text to make it more readable, more dramatic, or more
‘colourful’. It is certainly true that the perceived presence of figurative lan-
guage often seems to increase at points of emotional and dramatic intensity,
like the soaring violins at moments of sexual passion or dramatic tension
in a Hollywood film. Thus D.H. Lawrence, for example, is known for his
so-called ‘purple passages’. But simply to suggest that figures are ‘added’ to
literary language, like the musical soundtrack to a movie, does not get us very
far. The soaring violin theory of rhetorical figures is misguided because, as
Nietzsche suggests, language is inescapably figurative: the meaning of a text
cannot be separated from its expression, its figures.
Figuration is fundamental to our world, to our lives. An alteration in the
way we figure the world also involves an alteration in the way that the world
works. Take Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man(1952), for example. This novel
uses invisibility as a figure (both metaphorical and literal) for the marginality,
the oppression, effacement and dehumanization of black people in the United
States. Here is the opening to the prologue to Ellison’s great novel:
I am an invisible man. No, I am not a spook like those who haunted Edgar
Allan Poe; nor am I one of your Hollywood-movie ectoplasms. I am a man
of substance, of flesh and bone, fiber and liquids – and I might even be said
to possess a mind. I am invisible, understand, simply because people refuse
to see me. Like the bodiless heads you see sometimes in circus sideshows,
it is as though I have been surrounded by mirrors and hard, distorting glass.
When they approach me they see only my surroundings, themselves,
or figments of their imagination – indeed, everything and anything except
me. (3)
Visibility and invisibility figure the social, political and economic effacement
and consequent oppression of blacks in the United States. The man is invisi-
ble because he cannot escape the preconceptions that others have concerning
him. These preconceptions are produced by a ‘perception’ of his skin colour.
This so-called perception is itself an effect of the kind of rhetorical figure we
call synecdoche, whereby a part – here, the skin – stands for the whole – a man.
But simply to categorize someone as ‘black’ (or ‘white’) is in a sense laughably
reductive and inaccurate. Likewise, to say that someone is ‘coloured’ is in aFigures and tropes 83
sense to say nothing at all, because the skin, hair, nails, eyes, teeth of each one
of us is a multichromatic assemblage of different hues. The categories of black,
white and coloured operate as instances of synecdoche. What people ‘see’ is a
form of metaphor, a figment or figure of imagination – a ‘phantom in other
people’s minds...a figure in a nightmare which the sleeper tries with all his
strength to destroy’ (3). It is in this way that Ellison’s narrator is invisible, for
while people think that they see – they think they see a black man – in fact
they see nothing, they are blinded by metaphor. Ellison’s novel suggests that
such habitual blindness may be challenged and in turn transformed by acts of
language. It presents a metaphor or allegory of the invisible man to counter
the worn coin of representation. After all, the effacement of the black man is, in
a crucial sense, constituted through acts of language. Without the vocabulary
of prejudice and racism, any such effacement would be inconceivable. Racism
is an effect of language. In particular, the passage from Ellison cited above
suggests that racism is an effect of synecdochic substitution – skin pigment for
personal identity, individual for collective or racial identity. The invisible man
can be seen again, his invisibility perceived, through alternative metaphors,
through rhetorical figures.
The opening of Ellison’s novel, then, gives us one answer to the question of
how figures and tropes function in literary and other texts: they can make us
see what is otherwise invisible, concealed by prejudice, effaced by habit. They
seek to change the world. To recall the term used by Viktor Shklovsky and
other Russian formalist critics writing in the 1920s, figurative language has the
capacity to ‘defamiliarize’ our world – to refigure, reform, revolutionize.
What kinds of effects can be produced through figuration and how far
can a reading of such figures go? Let us consider another example, a poem by
the nineteenth-century New England poet Emily Dickinson. In Dickinson’s
work, figures, like language considered more generally, tremble on the edge
of meaning. One reason why her poetry is particularly appropriate in a dis-
cussion of figurative language is that it characteristically ‘deconstructs’ or
defamiliarizes its own rhetorical figures: her poetry constitutes a subtle yet
decisive assault on figuration itself. This poem (no. 328) was written around
1862:
A Bird came down the Walk—
He did not know I saw—
He bit an Angleworm in halves
And ate the fellow, raw,
5 And then he drank a Dew
From a convenient Grass—84 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
And then hopped sidewise to the Wall
To let a Beetle pass—
He glanced with rapid eyes
10 That hurried all around—
They looked like frightened Beads, I thought—
He stirred his Velvet Head
Like one in danger, Cautious,
I offered him a Crumb
15 And he unrolled his feathers
And rowed him softer home—
Than Oars divide the Ocean,
Too silver for a seam—
Or Butterflies, off Banks of Noon
20 Leap, plashless as they swim.
In language at once direct and elusive, the poem describes a bird eating a
worm, taking a drink and flying away. The rhetorical figure which stands out
in the opening lines is personification or anthropomorphism. Both the bird
(‘he’) and the worm (the ‘fellow’) of the first stanza are described as if they were
human. But the anthropomorphic insistence of the first half of the poem
becomes strangely convoluted as it goes on to explore the specificity of simile
(a is like b) as a species of metaphor (a is b, in other words the ‘like’ is unstated).
In line 11 we learn that the bird’s eyes ‘looked like frightened Beads’. But this
simile is not as simple as it looks. It remains unclear whether ‘looked like’
means that the eyes actively looked(they looked, in the way that beads look,
assuming that they do), or whether the bird’s eyes, to the narrator, looked like
beads. The simile is itself ambiguous. Moreover, whatthe eyes looked like –
the beads – also undergoes an uncanny metamorphosis. To refer to beads as
‘frightened’ is to employ the rhetorical figure called animism, whereby an
inanimate object is given the attributes of life. Far from clarifying the look
of the bird’s eyes, the simile makes it lessconcrete, less visible or imaginable,
by making a comparison with something that cannot possibly be seen. It is
entirely incorrect to say that the bird’s eyes ‘looked like’ frightened beads,
since frightenedbeads are not available to the gaze at all, and beads cannot
look. The simile, a peculiar example of a ‘transferred epithet’, disturbs the
sense of who or what is frightened and confounds the distinction between the
figurative and the literal, image and word, the imagined and the visible.Figures and tropes 85
The last two stanzas of the poem increase these uncertainties. In the penul-
timate stanza, rowing on an ocean is the ‘vehicle’ for the metaphor, the ‘tenor’
or ‘meaning’ of which is flying. But once again the figure is ambiguous: the
ocean metaphor is inadequate, the line suggests, to express the softness, the
silvery delicacy of the movement of the bird’s flight. Where a boat would leave
a wake in the water, a kind of seam, the bird leaves none in the air. But while
‘Too silver for a seam’ may be ‘translated’ as meaning something like ‘too delic-
ate for a wake or track in water’, the line may also be understood to be referring
to the delicacy of figurative language and its relation to the world. Critics
usually distinguish simile within metaphor more generally by pointing out
that phrases such as ‘like’ or ‘as’ mark simile as explicitly figurative. Through
another kind of figure known as paronomasia – produced by the homophone
‘seam’/‘seem’ – the poem reflects silently on figuration itself. Metaphors seem
to be unmarked, too silver, too subtle, for a seam, or for the word ‘seem’ (or ‘as’
or ‘like’), too delicate for the mark of figuration. Just as there is no seam left
behind after the bird’s flight – it flies as if by magic – metaphor also leaves no
mark, no ‘seem’ and no seam. Or, to put it more paradoxically but more
accurately, like the word ‘plashless’, a word which negates ‘plash’ but does so
only by referring to it, metaphor both does and does not leave a mark.
The extraordinary ending to the poem involves another metaphor for the
bird’s flight – the flight of a butterfly – but presents this in terms of swimming.
The bird is like a butterfly leaping off a bank into the water so delicately that
there is no (s)plash. With the phrase ‘Banks of Noon’, however, Dickinson’s
poem disturbs the basis of metaphorical transformation itself. ‘Banks of
Noon’ is no more comprehensible than the ‘frightened Beads’ encountered
earlier. The metaphorical transitions are short-circuited, for while it is pos-
sible to see that a bird’s flight is ‘like’ rowing a boat, it is unclear how a bank of
noon can be ‘like’ anything physical – are we to believe that ‘noon’ can be a
kind of riverbank, for example? The phrase highlights the deceptiveness of
figuration, its potential for linguistic effects of trompe l’æiland hallucination.
It dramatizes the ease, the inevitability with which language slides away
from referential assumptions. On the other hand, ‘Banks of Noon’ can be con-
sidered in terms of another kind of phenomenon – intertextuality – whereby a
text is woven out of words and phrases from elsewhere. In this respect, the
phrase recalls the Shakespearean ‘bank and shoal of time’ from Macbeth’s mur-
derous speech (MacbethI.vii.6) – giving the sense of the present as a kind of
isthmus within the ocean of eternity – and suggests the end or the edge of time,
time strangely suspended or delayed. The ending of Dickinson’s poem suggests
that figurative language entails a series of displacements and substitutions
which both produce and withhold the illusion of reference. In these and other86 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
ways, Dickinson’s poem suggests that figures make and unmake our world,
give us meaning and take it away.
In our discussion of Dickinson’s poem, we have drawn attention to the self-
reflexive possibilities of figuration, to the way that figures can turn reflexively
back on themselves, trope themselves, so that the text remarks on its own lan-
guage. To end our discussion of figures, we shall turn briefly to another text
which may also be shown to register the uncanny potential of figurative lan-
guage. In our chapter on narrative we referred briefly to James Joyce’s great
long short story ‘The Dead’. The story begins with the following sentence:
‘Lily, the caretaker’s daughter, was literally run off her feet’ (199). In fact, Lily
is not literallyrun off her feet at all. Strangely, we say ‘literally run off her feet’
to mean notliterally but figuratively run off her feet. The use of the word ‘literal’
here, like the phrase about feet, is metaphorical. In this respect, we can see that
the opening sentence to the story produces a play of figuration which refers
indirectly both to the subject of the story, death, and to its telling. ‘Literally run
offher feet’ is a dead metaphor, a metaphor which has become so common that
its identity as figurative has largely been lost: dead metaphors are Nietzsche’s
worn coins of language. We can say ‘I was literally run off my feet’ without
recognizing that we are using a metaphor at all, that far from using the phrase
literally, we are exploiting a figure of speech. The metaphorical use of the word
‘literally’ in this phrase is a good example of the evocative possibilities of ‘cat-
achresis’, the rhetorical term for a misuse or abuse of language. ‘The Dead’,
which is above all about death, is also about dead language, dead metaphors.
Joyce’s story ends with the return of a ‘figure from the dead’ (251), the
haunting memory of Gretta’s dead boyfriend, Michael Furey. In the final
pages, Gretta’s husband Gabriel looks out of the window of a hotel as his wife
sleeps. The last paragraph of the story is couched in intense, swooning, highly
figurative prose:
A few light taps upon the pane made him turn to the window. It had begun
to snow again. He watched sleepily the flakes, silver and dark, falling
obliquely against the lamplight. The time had come for him to set out on
his journey westward. Yes, the newspapers were right: snow was general
all over Ireland. It was falling on every part of the dark central plain, on the
treeless hills, falling softly upon the Bog of Allen and, farther westward,
softly falling into the dark mutinous Shannon waves. It was falling, too,
upon every part of the lonely churchyard on the hill where Michael Furey
lay buried. It lay thickly drifted on the crooked crosses and headstones, on
the spears of the little grate, on the barren thorns. His soul swooned slowly
as he heard the snow falling faintly through the universe and faintly falling,
like the descent of their last end, upon all the living and the dead. (255–6)Figures and tropes 87
The most remarkable, the most pressing feature of this paragraph is, perhaps,
repetition. In particular, the word ‘falling’ occurs seven times: falling obli-
quely, falling, falling softly, softly falling, falling, falling faintly, faintly falling.
This verbal repetition produces a mesmeric sense of descent, sleep, fading
and death. What Joyce appears to be evoking here, through figurative effects
of language – repetition, alliteration, assonance and sibilance, syntactic inver-
sion or chiasmus (‘falling faintly, faintly falling’) – is a fading out, a falling off,
of language itself. ‘The Dead’ is about the death of (figurative and literal)
language.
To borrow Joyce’s metaphor and reverse it, it is indeed the metaphorical
death of language (rather than the death of metaphorical language) that gives
the story life. And it is, more generally, the productive tensions of figurative
language that give life to literary texts. In this chapter, we have tried to suggest
that, like literature itself, literary criticism begins and ends with figuration. In
reading we should try to figure out ways in which figures at once generate
and disturb literary texts. Like Marvell’s lover in his desire to stop the sun (see
Chapter 4), if we cannot escape figures, still we can make them run.
Further reading
Two good recent ‘introductions’ to the idea of metaphor from the perspective
of literature and literary theory in the one case and linguistics and stylistics in
the other, are David Punter, Metaphor (2008) and Murray Knowles and
Rosamund Moon, Introducing Metaphor(2006). For an engaging and inform-
ative further guide to figures and tropes, see Arthur Quinn’s little book
Figures of Speech(1993). See Paul Ricoeur’s The Rule of Metaphor(1978) for
a difficult but comprehensive work on metaphor from the perspective of a
philosopher. For a classic literary critical approach, see Brooke-Rose’s A
Grammar of Metaphor(1958). An influential structuralist account of figura-
tion or ‘poetic’ language is Roman Jakobson’s ‘Closing Statement: Linguistics
and Poetics’ (1960). Derrida’s ‘White Mythology’ (1982) is a dense and
difficult but by now classic argument against the notion that there could be any
simple escape from figurative language. Other useful books are Todorov,
Introduction to Poetics(1981) and Lakoff and Johnson, Metaphors We Live By
(1980). ‘Silva Rhetoricae’ is a very helpful website for figures of speech, at
http://humanities.byu.edu/rhetoric/silva.htm.

11. Creative writing
Is this it then? Is this creative writing? What is ‘creative writing’ anyway,
and what is a chapter on creative writing doing in a book on literature,
criticism and theory? What is it that writing creates? And what is the differ-
ence between ‘creative writing’ and ‘literature’?
In what follows we would like to explore two general propositions: (1) ‘cre-
ative writing’ doesn’t appear from nowhere. It has a history and is closely
bound up with both the contemporary university and the current state of
English (both as a language and as a subject of study). In particular, the recent
surge in the popularity of ‘creative writing’ courses is intricately entwined with
the history of the term ‘literature’ and with recent developments in literary
criticism and theory. (2) Despite appearances perhaps, ‘creative writing’ often
serves to delimit the liberating and exhilarating, but also fearful possibilities
of language. In this, it shares something with the dictionary, which offers the
following definition of ‘creative’:
Specifically of literature and art, thus also of a writer or artist: inventive,
imaginative; exhibiting imagination as well as intellect, and thus differ-
entiated from the merely critical, ‘academic’, journalistic, professional,
mechanical, etc., in literary or artistic production. So creative writing,
such writing. (OED, sense 1b)
Let us note first of all that the OEDhas no hesitation in identifying ‘creative
writing’ with ‘literature’ and ‘art’. The OEDdefinition is predicated on the
basis of a firm distinction between ‘imagination’ and ‘intellect’. Thus ‘creative’
is differentiated from other sorts of writing (‘the merely critical, “academic”,
journalistic, professional, mechanical, etc.’). But how seriously can we take
this distinction? Is there nothing ‘creative’ about other sorts of writing?Creative writing 89
Definitions, as we know, are never ‘merely academic’: they are forms and
conduits of power. We might note one further intriguing detail in this dic-
tionary definition, namely the scare quotes around ‘academic’. ‘Creative
writing’, this might suggest, is both ‘academic’ and non-academic. As the
deceptive simplicity of the OEDdefinition is perhaps beginning to make clear,
‘creative writing’ has a strange relation to the academy and to the academic. In
fact, creative writing appears to have been institutionalized, in more than one
sense of that word, since the incorporation of ‘creative writing courses’ within
educational institutions is inevitably a form of appropriation and control. As
early as 1958 we find the Oxford Magazine(4 December, no. 164/2, cited in
OED) declaring that ‘In America established, or at any rate committed, writ-
ers have been absorbed, permanently or temporarily, into the apparatus of cre-
ative writing workshops.’ This ‘apparatus’, establishing itself across British
universities and elsewhere, has become increasingly powerful. Few practising
writers (novelists and poets in particular) today can become commercially
successful without becoming a part of this apparatus, however temporarily or
unwillingly. But there is also a more radical way of construing this apparatus
or ‘creative writing machine’, namely as the means by which the dangerous
and disruptive possibilities of language, and of ‘writing’ in particular, are
(apparently) contained, reduced, locked up. What does it mean that the
unpredictable powers of creativity, of creative writing, are being incorporated
into and assessed by the university? What is going on in the desire or apparent
need to turn creative writing into an ‘apparatus’, a useful tool or machine?
To begin to respond to such questions, we have first of all to reckon with the
ways that the emergence of ‘creative writing’ is linked to the history of the
concept of literature. As the OEDdefinition makes clear, ‘creative writing’ is
inseparable from the question of literature. It has been fashionable in recent
years, especially in the field of cultural studies, to regard literature as one sort
of discourse or cultural product among others, such as philosophical dis-
course, or a film, or a restaurant menu. But in this context, Bennett and Royle,
we like to think, is nothing if not unfashionable. Our concern is with the idea
that there is in fact something distinctive about literature and that, in short,
literature is not commensurable with other sorts of discourse. One reason for
this is quite simple: literature in a sense does not exist. It has no essence. It is
not a case of X being a literary text, and Y being non-literary. Literariness
is more spectral and elusive. Any text conventionally considered as literary
(Geoffrey Chaucer’s ‘The Wife of Bath’s Prologue and Tale’, say) can be read
as non-literary (for example, as an account of female sexuality in the Middle
Ages); and conversely, any text conventionally considered as non-literary
(a political speech, say) can be read as literary (for example, in terms of an90 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
enactment of the strange ways of language, the workings of metaphor and
other rhetorical figures). As Jacques Derrida has put it: ‘There is no literature
without a suspendedrelation to meaning and reference’ (Derrida 1992a, 48).
It is not that literature does not refer – for instance, we have to construe ‘wife’
and ‘Bath’ in relation to a world of ‘meaning and reference’, we have to make
some sort of sense of these two words. But literature has to do with a certain
suspendednessof such referring, as well as a dependenceon what is referred to.
To take another example: how should we read the phrase ‘midnight’s chil-
dren’, in the title of Salman Rushdie’s 1981 novel? We are impelled by a desire
to go beyond suspense, for example in order to be able to state categorically
and definitively that the words ‘midnight’s children’ refer to the moment on
the 14/15 August 1947 when India became independent and to the children
who happened to be born just at that time. But the peculiar literariness of the
title-phrase consists, at the same time, in the fact that it is enigmatic, resistant
to any final stable determination. One could not, after all, even hope to exhaust
the readings of the title without an exhaustive reading of the text to which that
title refers. Strangely suggesting that children are of or belonging to a time
(‘midnight’ with its connotations of the witching hour, darkness and mystery,
the peculiarly decisive yet uncertain, spooky border between day and night),
that there could be children of time but perhaps not space and that a book
could itself somehow bethese children, Rushdie’s title conjures the bizarre
telepathic mass of fictional narrative opened up in its name. Midnight’s
Children, after all, is not – or not only – social or political history: it is a novel,
a work of literature or (notice how odd this might sound) creative writing.
As we argue elsewhere in this book (see the chapter entitled ‘Mutant’),
‘literature’ is a comparatively modern invention. The emergence of creative
writing in the mid-twentieth century in the USA, and more recent institutional
expansions in the UK and elsewhere, are part and parcel of the process
whereby the question ‘What is literature?’ or ‘What is literariness?’ becomes a
central topic in literary texts themselves, as well as in literary criticism and the-
ory. It is in this context that we might situate the proliferation, in the twentieth
century, of poems about poetry and novels about novels. We might recall here
Wallace Stevens’s declaration in his great long poem The Man with the Blue
Guitar(1938): ‘Poetry is the subject of the poem, / From this the poem issues
and / To this returns’ (Stevens 176); or Samuel Beckett’s characterization of
the work of James Joyce: ‘His writing is not about something; it is that
something itself ’ (Beckett 1983, 27). Significantly also, in this context, the
last decades of the twentieth century witnessed the appearance of the term
‘metafiction’, to designate ‘fiction about fiction’, ‘self-conscious’ or ‘self-
reflexive fiction’ (a term dating from 1960, according to the OED). And theCreative writing 91
word ‘postmodern’ is of course bound up with this increasingly explicit
attention to the nature of the literary, to the literariness of the literary. But we
should not oversimplify this. No doubt literary works have, to greater or lesser
extents, always drawn attention to themselves, foregrounding their own
strange nature: think of Shakespeare’s plays within plays, in Hamlet or A
Midsummer Night’s Dream, or Cervantes’s Don Quixote, or Sterne’s Tristram
Shandy, or Diderot’s Jacques le fataliste, or Wordsworth’s The Prelude.
Nevertheless it also seems clear that creative writing is itself a new and differ-
ent kind of foregrounding. It is as if ‘Creative Writing’ were calling out: ‘Look
at me, come and write literature here, come and experience the literary, it’ll be
fun! This way to the creative writing class!’ This particular institutionalized
flagging of literature could also be regarded as a flagging in the sense of
‘becoming exhausted’ – and here we might think of Gilles Deleuze’s marvel-
lous essay on ‘the exhausted’ (in Deleuze 1998) as a way of understanding
contemporary literature (especially in the wake of Samuel Beckett). In all
sorts of ways, in fact, we might see literature (and therefore creative writing) as
coming to an end, its very existence increasingly threatened for example by the
ubiquities of visual, digital and text cultures (film, TV, video, DVD, texting,
email, the Internet, gaming). It is not without reason that J. Hillis Miller opens
his book On Literature (2002) with the words: ‘The end of literature is at
hand. Literature’s time is almost up’ (Miller 2002, 1).
But we do not necessarily want to link the rise of creative writing with the
‘end of literature’. (As Hillis Miller’s book goes on to make clear, things are in
fact more complex than his initial apocalyptic pronouncement might suggest.)
Instead, we would like to conclude by proposing six ways in which creative
writing offers new challenges and insights in relation to thinking about liter-
ature and literary studies.
1. ‘Creative writing’ is not simply opposed to ‘critical writing’. We might
most readily understand this in terms of the notion of metalanguage.
Metalanguage is language about language, a discourse that takes another
discourse as its object. Literature might thus be viewed as the ‘object-
discourse’ for which literary criticism or theory functions as a metalan-
guage. But the logic of metalanguage is everywhere. It was already operating
in our title phrase: ‘Creative writing’, this chapter, is not in any simple or
conventional sense an example of creative writing. ‘Creative writing’
signifies rather that this is a chapter about creative writing. Wherever
we encounter talking about talking, stories about stories, poems about
poetry, statements (like this one) that refer to themselves, we are engaged in
effects of metalanguage. But there is something odd about metalanguage,92 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
something that makes it a double-bind, that is to say at once necessary and
impossible. A metalinguistic or metadiscursive text (for example, a work of
literary criticism or theory) cannot proceed to take another text (a work of
literature or creative writing) as its object without that ‘object’ being at the
same time, in this very gesture, part of the ‘meta-text’. Metalanguage is
never pure, it always entails a logic of being apart from anddependent on
in its object-language. The acknowledgement that you cannot write about
another text without either doing something to it or its doing something
to your ‘own’ writing (if only by virtue of your quoting it, and therefore
quoting it out of context, in a new and different context) led Roland
Barthes to his celebrated declaration: ‘Let the commentary be itself a text’
(Barthes 1981, 44). Is Barthes a creative writer? The difficulty of respond-
ing to this question has to do, at least in part, with the ways in which his
work unsettles, plays with and over the putative borders and distinctions
between creative and critical writing. His texts (like those of Maurice
Blanchot, Jacques Derrida and Hélène Cixous) call for new forms, styles
and inventions both in literary criticism or theory and in literature or
creative writing. This is not to suggest, however, that creative and critical
writing are really just the same thing. Such is the other side of the double-
bind: metalanguage is necessary, as well as impossible. Critical writing
does not involve ‘a suspended relation to meaning and reference’ in the way
that literary or creative writing does.
2. One does not know, as one writes or as the writing comes, one cannot know
if it is creative or not, if it will have been creative or not. Who will have
been the judge of whether such and such a piece of writing is or is not
‘creative’? Isn’t ‘creative writing’ necessarily predicated on an experience
of reading that is to come, like a promise? ‘I promise to be creative,’ you
might say. But unlike other kinds of promises, it may not be in your own
power to determine whether or not you will be ‘creative’. Following
Cixous, we could say that the only ‘creative writing’ worthy of the name
entails the experience of what is beyond us, beyond our capabilities,
impossible. She declares: ‘The only book that is worth writing is the one
we don’t have the courage or strength to write. The book that hurts us (we
who are writing), that makes us tremble, redden, bleed’ (Cixous 1993, 32).
3. Creative writing, if there is any, entails what Timothy Clark (in his study
of the idea of inspiration) calls ‘a crisis of subjectivity’ (Clark 1997). He
suggests we might think about this in terms of the blank page facing the
would-be writer. This ‘blank page’ has been conceived in various ways.
The seventeenth-century poet Thomas Traherne, for example, described
it metaphorically, in terms of infancy: ‘An empty book is like an infant’sCreative writing 93
soul, in which anything may be written. It is capable of all things, but
containeth nothing’ (Traherne 1991, 187). Clark, on the other hand,
describes the blank page as a ‘virtual space’ that is ‘neither in the psyche of
the writer nor...outside it’: this ‘space of composition’, as he calls it,
‘skews distinctions of inner and outer’, of ‘self and other’ (Clark 1997, 22,
27). Writing, creative writing, is transformative, performative in ways
that cannot be calculated or foreseen. The writer does not simply precede
the writing. The figure of ‘the writer’ is in crucial respects always ‘phantas-
matic’, never simply ‘empirical’ or given (see Clark 1997, 24–6). As
Blanchot puts it: ‘Writing is nothing if it does not involve the writer in a
movement full of risks that will change him [or her] in one way or another’
(Blanchot 1995, 244). One of the things that makes creative writing, in
the context of the university, so distinctive and potentially troublesome is
that it entails an explicit engagement with these forms of the transform-
ative and performative, the risky and incalculable.
4. If creative writing involves an openness to otherness, to what has tradition-
ally been called ‘inspiration’ or ‘the muse’ or ‘God’, it nevertheless also
involves something singular, apparently unique, like a signature. It is some-
thing ‘akin to style’, as Raymond Carver remarks in his brief but powerful
essay ‘On Writing’, ‘but it isn’t style alone. It is the writer’s particular and
unmistakable signature on everything he [or she] writes. It is his [or her]
world and no other...[The writer] has some special way of looking at
things and...gives expression to that way of looking’ (Carver 1986, 22).
It is thus possible to read a phrase or sentence or two by, say, William Blake
(the Argument to ‘The Marriage of Heaven and Hell’) or Emily Dickinson
(Poem 214) or Franz Kafka (Aphorism 43 in The Collected Aphorisms), and
recognize in this the sort of style or signature to which Carver is referring:
Rintrah roars and shakes his fires in the burdened air;
Hungry clouds swag on the deep.
I taste a liquor never brewed—
From Tankards scooped in Pearl—
As yet the hounds are still playing in the courtyard, but their prey
will not escape, however fast it may already be charging through
the forest.
In each case it is a question of these lines, these phrases marking the
distinctive ‘style’ of a writer. No one but Blake could talk about Rintrah
roaring or hungry clouds swagging on the deep; no one but Dickinson94 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
could achieve quite this combination of the wondrous, the visceral and
the abstract; no one but Kafka offers quite this sense of inescapable claus-
trophobia and doom. We might here recall what Coleridge said of first
encountering two lines from Wordsworth’s ‘Winander Boy’: ‘had I met
these lines running wild in the deserts of Arabia, I should have instantly
screamed out “Wordsworth!”’ (Coleridge 1956–71, 1: 453).
In an extraordinary essay entitled ‘He Stuttered’, Gilles Deleuze de-
scribes this sort of signature or singularity in terms of the invention of a new
kind of language, a kind of foreign language within a language. He writes:
a great writer is always like a foreigner in the language in which he
expresses himself, even if this is his native tongue. At the limit, he
draws his strength from a mute and unknown minority that belongs
only to him. He is a foreigner in his own language: he does not mix
another language with his own language, he carves out a nonpreexi-
stent foreign language withinhis own language. He makes the language
itself scream, stutter, stammer, or murmur. (Deleuze 1998, 109–10)
This foreign language is never purely the writer’s own, of course: it is
always made up of words from elsewhere and might always turn out to have
been the wrong language. Such is the anguish and uncertainty evoked by
Roland Barthes when he writes, of himself, as if he were a character in a
novel: ‘Writing a certain text, he experiences a guilty emotion of jargon,
as if he could not escape from a mad discourse no matter how individual
he made his utterance: and what if all his life he had chosen the wrong
language!’ (Barthes 1977c, 114–15).
5. Creative writing happens, if it happens, in a strange nursery. This is
another way in which, as a course or subject, ‘creative writing’ inhabits a
quite disturbing and peculiar place within the university: the university is
perhaps no longer to be understood as an adult venue, or even as a place in
which you mature or ‘grow up’. As Sigmund Freud remarks in ‘Creative
Writers and Day-Dreaming’ (1907): ‘every child at play behaves like a cre-
ative writer’ (Freud 1985f, 131). The greater the creative artist, in Freud’s
view, the more he (or she) remains childlike. As he declares in another
essay, on Leonardo da Vinci: ‘all great [artists] are bound to retain some
infantile part. Even as an adult [Leonardo] continued to play, and this was
another reason why he often appeared uncanny and incomprehensible to
his contemporaries’ (Freud 1985g, 220).
6. Creative writing, if there is any, is urgent despatch, with radically uncertain
address. Paul Celan’s description of a poem as ‘a message in a bottle’
(Celan 1986, 34; quoted in Clark 1997, 272) is apt here. A work of creativeCreative writing 95
writing would be a sort of letter, perhaps a letter-bomb. Elizabeth Bowen
says of her first experience of reading Rider Haggard’s strange novel She:
‘After She...I was prepared to handle any book like a bomb’ (Bowen
1986, 250). If you are thinking of writing a novel, it is ‘Not a bad plan to
think [it’s] going to be a letter’ (Forster 1976, 162), suggests E.M. Forster
– but a letter being read, we might add, after you’re dead. Creative writing:
keep it compact, think of that iceberg Ernest Hemingway talked about
(seven-eighths of the text should be invisible: see Hemingway 2000,
1694), hurry up, it’s a matter of life and death, write now. As the Jewish
proverb has it: ‘Sleep faster! We need the pillows’ (quoted in Bloom 1994,
448).
Further reading
The Station Hill Blanchot Reader(1999) brings together an excellent selec-
tion of Maurice Blanchot’s fiction as well as of his remarkable meditations on
the nature of writing, critical and creative. For two of Barthes’s most influen-
tial and provocative essays on the unstable or dissolving boundaries between
literature, criticism and theory, see Barthes 1977c, 1981. For two fine collec-
tions of Hélène Cixous’s extraordinary essays on writing, see Three Steps on
the Ladder of Writing (1993) and Stigmata: Escaping Texts (1998); for
an excellent collection of interviews with her, on and around the subject of
writing, see White Ink(2008). Gilles Deleuze’s Essays Critical and Clinical
(Deleuze 1998) contains numerous fascinating pieces, including ‘Literature
and Life’, ‘He Stuttered’ and ‘The Exhausted’. Timothy Clark’s The Theory
of Inspiration (Clark 1997) offers a rich and stimulating historical and
theoretical account of the nature of inspiration and literary composition, espe-
cially from the eighteenth century to the present. For an important broader
account of creativity, especially engaging with more scientific perspectives,
see Margaret A. Boden’s The Creative Mind(Boden 2004). On the concept
and practice of metafiction, there is a good collection of essays entitled
Metafiction, edited by Mark Currie (1995). On issues relating to literature,
politics and the university, see Derrida’s brilliant essay on ‘The University
without Condition’ (Derrida 2002a). Finally, on the relationship between
creative writing and psychoanalysis, see Freud’s ‘Creative Writers and Day-
Dreaming’ (Freud 1985f); on Freud himself as a writer, see Mahony 1987,
Edmundson 1990 and Young 1999; and for a particularly ‘wild’ but fascinat-
ing exploration of the implications and effects of psychoanalysis for creativity,
see Chasseguet-Smirget 1984.

12. Laughter
‘We are very sorry, indeed, to learn what happened,’ said a BBC spokesman
on hearing about the death of a Goodies fan while watching the show.
‘He just laughed heartily and too long,’ said his wife. ‘After 25 minutes
of laughing he gave a tremendous belly laugh, slumped on the settee, and
died. (He) loved the Goodies, and it was one of the best for a long time’...
(Guardian, 26 March 1975)
T
he man’s death was, no doubt, a great misfortune. But, as the response of
his wife might suggest, there was also something quite funny, and even
appropriate about it. The word ‘funny’ here is oddly ambiguous: how funny it
is, after all, that a word (‘funny’) should mean both ‘amusing’ and ‘strange’.
The peculiar appropriateness of the death of this Goodies fan consists not
only in the fact that it was a particularly good episode of the comedy pro-
gramme (‘one of the best for a long time’), but also in the way in which it is sug-
gestive of a more general and perhaps more intimate link between laughter and
death. When we say that someone ‘died laughing’ or ‘laughed themselves to
death’ we are, in most circumstances, speaking metaphorically. What is funny
(in both senses) about the case of the Goodies fan is that it involves a literaliza-
tion of this metaphor. To take a metaphor literally (which can also be called
‘catachresis’ or ‘misapplication of a word’) is an example of a rhetorical device
that is often very effective as a means of generating laughter. In this respect it
would seem that the man’s death conforms to the conventions of comedy. But,
of course, there is also a darker side to this, the side that involves ‘funny’ in the
sense of ‘funny peculiar’. In other words, what this newspaper report also
prompts us to ask is: why do we talk about ‘dying with laughter’ or ‘laughing
oneself to death’? Why do we talk about actors ‘corpsing’, in other words, ofLaughter 97
being unable to speak their lines because of a sudden fit of hysterical laughter?
Are all these instances simplymetaphorical? Is there something about laugh-
ter that, in a profound if ticklish way, puts it in touch with death? Let us leave
these questions in suspense for a little while.
What about laughter and literature? We often think of literature as very
(or, dare one say, ‘deadly’) serious, especially if we are studying it. In part
this is because (as we suggest in greater detail in Chapter 19) literature is
linked to notions of the sacred, to a sense of hushed respect. But literature
is also about pleasure, play and laughter. In this chapter we shall attempt to
provide an account of some of the ways in which laughter has been theorized,
down the centuries, and attempt to illustrate these theories in relation to par-
ticular literary texts. Finally, we shall focus on the idea of literature as a space
in which the notion of seriousness itself, and the distinctions between the
‘serious’ and ‘non-serious’, are fundamentally unsettled, thrown into ques-
tion, discombobulated.
There are few things worse than the prospect of trying to talk about laugh-
ter, or trying to define what is humorous. It is something of a lost cause from
the start. It automatically seems to put us – if we dare risk a slightly risible ana-
logy at this point – in the position of the frog, in the joke about the frog, the
chicken and the librarian. A chicken walks into the local town library, goes
up to the librarian’s desk and says: ‘Bok!’ So the librarian gives the chicken
a book. The chicken goes away, but comes back the next day, goes up to the
librarian’s desk and says: ‘Bok, bok!’ So the librarian gives the chicken two
books, the chicken goes away, comes back the next day: ‘Bok, bok, bok!’ So
the librarian provides the chicken with three more books. And the next day
‘Bok, bok, bok, bok!’ and so on until the fifth day, when the chicken comes
in and says to the librarian, ‘Bok, bok, bok, bok, bok!’ The librarian hands
over five books but then decides to follow the chicken, at a surreptitious
distance, out of the library. The librarian follows as the chicken goes down the
street, across the road and down a smaller street, then through an unbolted
wooden door, down a passageway, into a garden, across the garden to a small
lake, across a narrow bridge to an island in the middle, where the chicken puts
the books down in front of a frog who says: ‘Reddit, reddit...’
If there is laughter here it would be the result of a number of things. First,
there is the ridiculous anthropomorphism: chickens do not go to libraries,
librarians do not respond to chickens as if they were simply ‘members of the
public’, frogs do not read books. Second, there is the pleasure of recognition
as we realize that the ‘bok, bok’ of a chicken could after all be heard as a request
for a book, or for two books, and that the croaking of a frog might indeed be
construed as ‘read it, read it’. Third, there is the sense of a so-called shaggy98 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
dog story, the feeling that the story could go on indefinitely, that the chicken
could, at least in principle, order up the entire holdings of the British Library.
Bok, bok, bok...Here laughter would be linked to suspense, and more
specifically perhaps to the hysterical effect of a potentially permanent post-
ponement of a resolution. It is this which in part at least constitutes the comic
force of a play such as Beckett’s Waiting for Godot(1953). But by the same
token it would also be what haunts or menaces every tragedy: comedy in this
sense could be defined as the overturning of the tragic. But there is perhaps
also, by contrast, something comical about the very corniness (so to speak)
of the joke, its ‘cheepness’ and groan-making quality. In this respect the joke
relies on a certain surprise – the surprise of the punchline – and a certain
recognition: you know that a punchline is going to come and what sort of
punchline it will be, but you cannot tell exactly what it will be. There is a child-
like pleasure involved in laughing at something at once surprising and familiar.
Perhaps indeed, as Freud argues in his fascinating book Jokes and Their
Relation to the Unconscious(1905), ‘everything comic is based fundamentally
on degradation [or “stepping down”] to being a child’ (Freud 1976, 292).
Finally, this ridiculous story about the frog, the chicken and the librarian sug-
gests something about the relations between laughter, reading and mystery.
For perhaps what is also funny about the story is the implicit hyperbole
whereby anyone (let alone a frog) could be expected to have read everything.
In this respect we can never be in the position of the frog or – to put it more
specifically in terms of our argument in this chapter – there is never a truly
froglike position from which to provide a serious account of laughter. Any
theory of laughter, we would like to suggest, is necessarily infected, under-
mined, displaced by the experience of laughter itself.
Let us consider a couple of the basic theories of laughter. The first is
the ‘superiority theory’. It is succinctly and memorably formulated by the
seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes: ‘The passion of
laughter is nothing else but sudden gloryarising from some sudden conception
of some eminency in ourselves, by comparisonwith the infirmityof others,
or with our own formerly’ (Hobbes 1840, 46). We laugh, according to this
argument, out of a sense of superiority – the ‘sudden glory’ or ‘conception
of eminency’ in relation to the stupidity or weakness of others, or of ourselves
at some point in the past. Thus, for example, we may laugh at the man who
slips over on the banana skin, or we may laugh at Bottom, in A Midsummer
Night’s Dream, because he is such an ass, or we may laugh with Swift at the
small-mindedness of other human beings, for example in Book I of Gulliver’s
Travels(1726).Laughter 99
The second theory is what we could call the ‘nothing theory’ or the ‘no
theory’ theory. This may be illustrated by way of the Monty Python sketch in
which a woman called Miss Anne Elk (John Cleese in drag) is interviewed
because she is supposed to have a new theory about the brontosaurus. Miss
Elk will not disclose her theory but seems instead concerned simply to say
over and over again that she hasa theory and that the theory is hers: ‘my theory
that I have, that is to say, which is mine, is mine’. Chris, the interviewer
(Graham Chapman), becoming exasperated, says: ‘Yes, I know it’s yours,
what is it?’ Looking rather nervously around the studio, Anne Elk replies:
‘Where?’ (Monty Python’s Flying Circus 1989, 119) When Miss Elk does
finally enunciate her theory it is truly bathetic – in fact, no theory at all:
Miss Elk Ready?
Presenter Yes.
Miss Elk My theory by A. Elk. Brackets Miss, brackets. This theory goes
as follows and begins now. All brontosauruses are thin at one end, much
much thicker in the middle and then thin again at the far end. That is my
theory, it is mine, and belongs to me and I own it, and what it is too.
Presenter That’s it, is it?
Miss Elk Spot on, Chris. (119)
In more sombre and philosophical terms, the ‘nothing theory’ or ‘no theory’
theory is suggested, for instance, by Immanuel Kant’s proposition that
‘Laughter is an affection arising from a strained expectation being suddenly
reduced to nothing’ (Kant 1988, 199). Laughter is nothing more than the
bursting of a bubble. When we laugh, according to this argument, we are
laughing in a sort of ‘absurd’ vacuum: ‘merely’ laughing, with nothing to
support us. In a fascinating essay entitled ‘The Laughter of Being’, Mikkel
Borch-Jacobsen suggests a radicalization of this Kantian formulation.
Following the work of the French writer Georges Bataille in particular, he
argues that ‘There is no theory of laughter, only an experience’ (Borch-
Jacobsen 1987, 742). Moreover, this experience is of a decidedly ‘funny’ sort
– for it is an experience of, precisely, nothing. As Bataille puts it: ‘[when I
laugh,] I am in fact nothing more than the laughter which takes hold of me’
(Bataille 1973, 364, cited by Borch-Jacobsen, 744).
Let us turn from ‘theory’ to consider some literary examples. Laughter can
be dependent on the visual – and literature is full of instances of visual comedy.
But laughter, at least in literature, is perhaps more fundamentally a matter of
language. One of the greatest eighteenth-century English comedies is Richard
Brinsley Sheridan’s play The School for Scandal (first performed in 1777).100 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
It contains numerous classic moments of visual comedy (characters in dis-
guise, hiding themselves behind screens, being thrust hastily into closets and
so on), but the comic power of Sheridan’s play consists above all in its lan-
guage. This starts from the very title of the play – with its satirical implication
that scandalmongering is something to be taught – and from the names of
its characters – a woman called Lady Sneerwell, her servant, Snake, a gentle-
man called Sir Benjamin Backbite, and so forth. We could consider a brief
exchange between Lady Sneerwell and Mr Snake on the subject of her
‘superiority’ over other slanderers and scandalmongers such as Mrs Clackitt:
Lady Sneerwell Why truly Mrs Clackitt has a very pretty talent – and a
great deal of industry.
Snake True, madam, and has been tolerably successful in her day. To my
knowledge she has been the cause of six matches being broken off and
three sons disinherited, of four forced elopements, and as many close
confinements, nine separate maintenances, and two divorces. Nay, I have
more than once traced her causing a tête-à-têtein the Town and Country
Magazine, when the parties perhaps had never seen each other’s face before
in the course of their lives.
Lady Sneerwell She certainly has talents, but her manneris gross.
Snake ’Tis very true. She generally designs well, has a free tongue, and
a bold invention; but her colouring is too dark and her outlines often
extravagant. She wants that delicacy of hint and mellowness of sneer which
distinguishes your ladyship’s scandal.
Lady Sneerwell You are partial, Snake. (I, i, 10–26)
We can imagine the comic possibilities of the characters’ gestures and
appearance, but what is most comic is in the language itself – in the satirical
observation on what it means to be ‘tolerably successful’, in the incongruity
or absurdity of evaluating who has the more beautiful ‘sneer’, in the snaking
sibilance of Snake’s last sentence, in the playful truth of Lady Sneerwell’s
final remark.
The play called The School for Scandalis, then, fundamentally wordplay.
Indeed, we could say, literature in general has to do with wordplay or – to use
a more technical-sounding term – with paronomasia. This is in part what
makes it potentially so subversive and disturbing. Could there really be a char-
acter called Snake? Or a woman called Lady Sneerwell? What kind of world
do they belong to? Literature is a matter of linguistic as well as social scandal.
It poses a constant challenge to the realms of so-called ‘good sense’ and
represents an affront to what could be called the ideology of seriousness.
Paronomasia is indeed so originary a dimension of literary works that one isLaughter 101
tempted to agree with the narrator of Samuel Beckett’s Murphy(1938) and
say: ‘In the beginning was the pun’ (41). Even Shakespeare becomes open to
criticism on this front. Literary critics may not have much of a reputation for
being amusing – but critical indignation at Shakespeare’s soft spot for the
‘quibble’ (or ‘pun’) gives rise to what we think is one of the funniest paragraphs
in the history of literary criticism. Here is Samuel Johnson’s fascinating and
irresistible paragraph from his Preface to Shakespeare (1765):
A quibble is to Shakespeare what luminous vapours are to the traveller;
he follows it at all adventures; it is sure to lead him out of his way and sure to
engulf him in the mire. It has some malignant power over his mind, and its
fascinations are irresistible. Whatever be the dignity or profundity of his
disquisition, whether he be enlarging knowledge or exalting affection,
whether he be amusing attention with incidents or enchaining it in sus-
pense, let but a quibble spring up before him, and he leaves his work
unfinished. A quibble is the golden apple for which he will always turn aside
from his career or stoop from his elevation. A quibble, poor and barren as it
is, gave him such delight that he was content to purchase it by the sacrifice
of reason, propriety, and truth. A quibble was to him the fatal Cleopatra for
which he lost the world and was content to lose it. (Johnson 1969, 68)
It is perhaps difficult not to find the ‘dignity’ and ‘profundity’ of Johnson’s
‘disquisition’ amusing: he quibbles about quibbling in terms as extravagant
as any in Shakespeare. In the process he also delightfully intimates what is
often so compelling about such wordplay, namely its playful mixing of sex
and death: the quibble is the apple of Shakespeare’s I, the obscure object of
desire, at once ‘barren’ and ‘the fatal Cleopatra’.
We will now consider another, rather different kind of literary work,
Geoffrey Chaucer’s ‘The Miller’s Tale’. This is the story, set in Oxford, about
the superstitious old carpenter John, his beautiful young wife Alisoun, and
their handsome lodger, Nicholas. Along with a rather absurd rival called
Absolon, Nicholas is after the young wife. Chaucer’s tale recounts, with
superb comic concision, how Nicholas persuades John that the end of the
world is coming, in order to distract him so that he can get into bed with the
old man’s wife. John ends up with a broken arm, but Nicholas finally fares
worse. That same night, Alisoun has already humiliated Absolon: he craves a
kiss from her and she agrees, but in the dark Absolon finds himself kissing
her arse, not her mouth. When Nicholas tries to repeat this jape, and indeed
embellish it with a thundering fart, he receives a burning hot poker up his
bum. In order to try to convey what makes Chaucer’s ‘The Miller’s Tale’ one102 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of the greatest comic poems ever written we could point to the visual comedy
of John the Carpenter up in the rooftop cutting the cable and crashing down,
convinced that the flood is coming and that he’ll be safe in the ‘kneeding-
tubbe’ that will be his mini Noah’s ark. This fall might be seen as a literaliza-
tion and structural equivalent of the fall of the tragic hero. In this respect
comedy is not the oppositeof tragedy but the same, viewed from a different
perspective. While we identify with the tragic hero or heroine, we stand
apart from or above the comic victim. Chaucer’s poem, then, offers a clear
example of the Hobbesian motif: we laugh because we are not stupid like
John the Carpenter. The carpenter falls. We remain where we are, superior,
riding high.
But we must at the same time acknowledge that all of this is in a sense only
happening in language, as something being narrated. And indeed the comic
force of ‘The Miller’s Tale’ is very specifically linguistic. It is not only a
matter of the brutally eloquent account of John’s cuckolding, or the satirical
portrayal of Absolon’s fashion-conscious, prancing character, or the bawdy
language of pissing and ‘letting flee’ monumental farts. It is also, and most
crucially, that the whole story seems to be structured like a joke condensed
from or into the single word, ‘water’. The whole text turns on the double
signification of ‘water’: for Nicholas it’s a screamed request for an anodyne to
salve his sizzling arse, for John it signifies that the flood is upon them. The two
parts of the story are explosively assembled in the wordplay or paronomasia
around this single word:
The hote culter brende so his toute,
And for the smert he wende for to dye.
As he were wood, for wo he gan to crye—
‘Help! water! water! help, for Goddes herte!’
This carpenter out of his slomber sterte,
And herde oon cryen ‘water!’ as he were wood,
And thoghte, ‘Allas, now comth Nowelis flood!’
He sit him up withouten wordes mo,
And with his ax he smoot the corde atwo,
And doun goth al...
(lines 709–18)
[The hot poker burnt his bum so badly he thought he was going to die
of the pain. Like a lunatic he cried out in woe: ‘Help! Water! Water!
Help, for God’s sake!’ Hearing someone madly cry ‘Water!’ the
carpenter started out of his sleep and thought ‘Oh no! It’s Noah’s
flood!’ He sits up like a shot and cuts the rope with his axe, and every-
thing gives way...]Laughter 103
The visual comedy of the fall (whether from the roof in Chaucer, or on a
banana skin in The Simpsons), and the accompanying emphasis on high and
low, seems to have a ‘funny’ counterpart in the terms of rhetorical figures and
tropes. Thus what creates laughter in a text is often either hyperbole (exagger-
ation) or litotes (understatement). Some examples of hyperbole would be the
sorts of comparative metaphor for which Raymond Chandler’s work is cele-
brated. In The Little Sister(1949), for instance, we encounter the gorgeous
Miss Gonzales who, Marlowe tells us, ‘smelled the way the Taj Mahal looked
by moonlight’ (70), had a ‘mouth as red as a new fire engine’ (158) and who
proceeds to make ‘a couple of drinks in a couple of glasses you could almost
have stood umbrellas in’ (70). Correspondingly we are told of a man wearing
‘sky-blue gaberdine slacks...and a two-tone leisure jacket which would have
been revolting on a zebra’ (84) and a police lieutenant called Maglachan who
‘had a jaw like a park bench’ (167). Litotes, on the other hand, is a pervasive
trope in Jonathan Swift’s A Modest Proposal(1729), a text which also illus-
trates the fundamental, if in many ways disturbing, power of irony as a comic
dimension of literary texts. A Modest Proposal works by understatement
and irony. It modestly (or litotically) proposes that a solution to poverty and
population management in Ireland might be the killing of small children, then
selling and eating them.
Outside of literature, we might say, it is possible to entertain perfectly seri-
ous ideas about laughter, about jokes, comedy and humour. Thus Freud’s
Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious(Freud 1976) is a fascinating work,
not only for the similarities it reveals between the structure of jokes and dreams
(and by implication, therefore, the structure of works of literature as well), but
also for the basic and in some ways disturbing truth it offers as regards the
nature of most jokes. Freud argues that jokes tend to be sexist, ‘dirty’, violent,
racist: they transgress social taboos and (momentarily) ‘lift’ repression. But
literature, conversely, might be defined as the space in which the seriousness
of Freud’s or anyone else’s claims are ironized, satirized, parodied or other-
wise put into question. For literature is the discourse that is, perhaps more
than any other, concerned with questioning and unsettling assumptions about
what is serious and what is not serious. Such a questioning and unsettling
is often associated with ‘the postmodern’. Postmodern works such as the
plays of Samuel Beckett, the poetry of John Ashbery or the fiction of David
Foster Wallace present a disquieting, irresolvable mixture of the serious and
non-serious, tragic and comic, macabre and laughable. This uncomfortable
mixture, however, might also be seen to be at play in Shakespeare’s tragedies,
for example, or indeed in Chaucer’s ‘The Miller’s Tale’, which ends with a
scene in which everyone is laughing but where it is no longer clear what kind104 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of laughter it is or who is laughing at what or who. As we have suggested, the
study of literature is in various ways policed by a kind of ideology of serious-
ness. There is a strong tendency to accept the rules, to adhere to boundaries
and categories, to say: the study of literature is a serious affair. Or to say: X is a
serious text or a serious moment in a text, whereas Y is not serious. No doubt
in the context of the novel, ‘realism’ has been and in many ways continues to be
the very embodiment of a certain ‘seriousness’. But the postmodern prompts
us to ask various questions in this respect: how seriously, for example, should
we take ‘realism’ or ‘reality effects’ in literature? What does seriousness imply
or assume? Who are the police and what is the nature of their authority?
Laughter can both liberate and mystify. It can be diabolical. It can be at
once offensive (laughing at sexist or racist jokes, for instance) and inoffensive
(it was ‘only a joke’). It can be cruel, a means of exclusion or of exerting power
over people (‘then she just laughed in my face’). But it can also be joyous, a
means of sharing and of confirming one’s sense of ‘social community’. As
Freud observes of jokes: ‘Every joke calls for a public of its own and laughing
at the same jokes is evidence of far-reaching psychical conformity’ (Freud
1976, 203–4). Laughter can be undecidably ‘real’ and ‘unreal’, ‘genuine’ and
‘false’. It can be tiring, it can have you on your hands and knees. It can be
uncontrollable, as if with a life of its own. In the engulfment of uncontrollable
laughter we lose a sense of who or what we are. We can feel ourselves reduced
to nothing. Every pretension to mastery or superiority collapses and dissolves.
Laughter becomes the obliteration of identity. It is this obliteration – when one
is truly engulfed in laughter, when one is nothing but this laughter – that
perhaps gives laughter its strange intimacy with death.
Further reading
For two classic accounts of laughter and the comic, see Henri Bergson,
Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic(1921) and Sigmund Freud,
Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1976). Freud also has a short
but extremely interesting essay on the nature of humour (in Freud 1985d).
Bergson’s essay is reprinted in Sypher, ed., Comedy (1956) which also
reprints George Meredith’s eloquent ‘An Essay on Comedy’ (1877). Barry
Saunders’s Sudden Glory: Laughter as Subversive History(1996) is an access-
ible and thought-provoking account of the anti-authoritarian powers of
laughter. Glen Cavaliero’s The Alchemy of Laughter (2005) is an engaging
exploration of laughter in literature from Henry Fielding to Samuel Beckett,
while A History of English Laughter: Laughter from Beowulf to Beckett and
Beyond, ed. Manfred Pfister (2002) comprises an enjoyably eccentric gatheringLaughter 105
of essays, on writers including Chaucer, Milton, Sterne and Joyce. Simon
Critchley’s On Humour(2002) is an informative and entertaining little book,
dealing in further detail with many of the topics discussed in the present
chapter. Arthur Koestler’s The Act of Creation(1964) contains some engaging
and thoughtful material on ‘the jester’ and the nature of laughter. On quibbling
in Shakespeare, see M.M. Mahood’s Shakespeare’s Wordplay (1957) and,
especially in a sexual context, Eric Partridge’s classic Shakespeare’s Bawdy
(2001, first published in 1947). For an account of Chaucer in a similar vein,
see Thomas W. Ross (1972). For a wide-ranging and challenging collection
of essays on puns and wordplay, see Jonathan Culler, ed., On Puns(1988a).
For a varied collection of essays on comedy from a historical perspective,
see Cordner, Holland and Kerrigan, eds, English Comedy (1994). Borch-
Jacobsen’s complex but excellent account of theories of laughter, ‘The
Laughter of Being’, appears in a ‘Laughter’ special issue of Modern Language
Notes (1987). Of particular interest in the same issue are Samuel Weber’s
‘Laughing in the Meanwhile’ (1987) and Jean-Luc Nancy’s ‘Wild Laughter in
the Throat of Death’ (1987); see also Nancy’s interrogation of his own ques-
tion ‘Is it possible to be in the presence of laughter?’ in ‘Laughter, Presence’
(1993). From a feminist perspective, see Gray, Women and Laughter(1994).

13. The tragic
Tragedy tears us apart, it shatters our sense of ourselves and the world. The
terrifying power of tragedy is suggested by Sir Philip Sidney when he
speaks, in An Apology for Poetry(1595), of
high and excellent Tragedy, that openeth the greatest wounds, and showeth
forth the ulcers that are covered with tissue; that maketh kings fear to be
tyrants, and tyrants manifest their tyrannical humours; that, with stirring
the affects of admiration and commiseration, teacheth the uncertainty of
this world, and upon how weak foundations gilden roofs are builded...
(98)
Tragedy has to do with strangeness. It involves an overwhelming sense of what
Sidney calls ‘the uncertainty of this world’. It involves – as Aristotle suggested,
more than 2,300 years ago – a paradoxical combination of emotions, at once
pity and fear or (as Sidney says) ‘admiration and commiseration’. Tragedy
involves an encounter not only with the death of a character on stage (or in
the pages of a book) but also with the idea of our own deaths. Tragedy resists
simple explanations. As A.C. Bradley observed, in 1904: ‘tragedy would not
be tragedy if it were not a painful mystery’ (38). In this chapter we propose
to elucidate this sense of ‘painful mystery’ and to consider some examples of
tragic literature, ranging from Shakespeare to the present.
When we think of tragedy in the context of literature in English, no doubt
we think first of Shakespeare and especially of the ‘great tragedies’, Hamlet
(1600–1), Othello(1604), King Lear(1605) and Macbeth(1606). With such
plays in mind, and adapting Aristotle’s definition in the Poetics, we could
suggest that tragedy comprises four basic elements. The first is that there is aThe tragic 107
central character (the protagonist), someone who is ‘noble’ and with whom
we are able to sympathize or identify. The second is that this character should
suffer and (preferably) die, and that his or her downfall or death should
roughly coincide with the end of the play. The third is that the downfall or
death of the central character should be felt by the spectator or reader to be
both inevitable and ‘right’ but at the same time in some sense unjustifiable and
unacceptable. The fourth element can be referred to as apocalypticism. As
we have already indicated, it is not just the death of the protagonist that we are
presented with in a tragedy: in identifying with the protagonist who dies, we
are also drawn into thinking about our own death. And because the protagon-
ist’s death is invariably shattering to other characters, tragedy always engages
with a broader sense of death and destruction, a shattering of society or the
world as a whole.
Without these four elements there cannot be a tragedy. From an
Aristotelian perspective we might want to propose additional elements, in
particular the notions of peripeteia (‘reversal’), anagnorisis (‘revelation’ or
‘coming to self-knowledge’) and hamartia(‘tragic flaw’ or ‘error’). Peripeteia
is a useful term for referring to the reversals or sudden changes in fortune that
a character or characters may experience – Lear’s being made homeless, for
instance, or Othello’s being transformed by ‘the green-ey’d monster’ (III, iii,
166) of jealousy. Aristotle introduced the term in the context of tragedy,
though it is also apposite in other contexts, including comedy (where a char-
acter may experience a reversal or sudden change for the good). Anagnorisis
refers to the idea of a moment of revelation or recognition, especially the
moment when a protagonist experiences a sudden awakening to the truth or
to self-knowledge. A tragic work may contain more than one such moment:
Hamlet’s life, for instance, might be described as a sort of anagnorisis‘block’,
a ghostly series of apparent but ineffective anagnorises starting with his
exclamation ‘O my prophetic soul!’ (I, v, 40) on discovering the murderous
truth about his father’s death and realizing that this is what he had imagined,
deep in his ‘prophetic soul’. Classically, though, a tragedy tends to be
construed as having one crucial or climactic moment of anagnorisis. In
Sophocles’s Oedipus the King, for example, this can be very specifically
located in lines 1306–08, as Oedipus finally realizes that he is himself the
criminal he has been seeking:
O god—
all come true, all burst to light!
O light—now let me look my last on you!
I stand revealed at last.108 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Finally, hamartiarefers to the idea of tragic characters having a particular flaw
or weakness, or making an error of judgement which leads to their downfall or
death. Thus, for example, each of the male protagonists of Shakespeare’s
‘great tragedies’ could be considered in terms of a fundamental moral or psy-
chological weakness. Hamlet’s irresolution, Othello’s jealousy, Lear’s pride
and Macbeth’s ambition might then be seen as a key element in each of these
works. A primary aim in this chapter, however, is to stress the ways in which
the tragic entails a fundamental sense of what remains painful, mysterious
or uncertain. That is to say, to focus on a character’s ‘tragic flaw’ or ‘error’
tends to suggest something straightforwardly causal: Hamlet’s irresoluteness
is the cause of his tragedy and so on. This is not to say that Hamlet’s irresolu-
tion or Othello’s jealousy are unimportant. These ‘flaws’ or ‘weaknesses’
are crucial – they are integral to what we think and feel about Hamlet
and Othello as characters and therefore to what we think and feel about
their tragic fates. But what constitutes the tragic is always stranger and more
painful than is suggested by the inevitably moralistic and reductive claim
that, for instance, Othello should not have allowed himself to get so jealous
and worked up. His jealousy has a crucial but partial and perhaps finally
uncertain significance in terms of the tragic power of the play. About to
murder his beloved wife, Othello begins what is one of the most anguished
and intolerable soliloquies in Shakespeare’s work: ‘It is the cause, it is the
cause, my soul; / Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, / It is the cause’
(V, ii, 1–3). ‘Cause’ here may mean ‘crime’, ‘legal or other case’ or ‘reason’.
What is conveyed in these lines is a sense of what cannot be named, a profound
strangeness and uncertainty regarding the very sense of this repeated and
equivocal word, ‘cause’. Tragedy, we want to suggest, and as Othellopointedly
demonstrates, is not only about the sense of particular causes or explan-
ations but also, and more importantly, about a painful absence or uncertainty
of cause.
Tragedy (and here we use the word to embrace both Shakespearean and
more recent forms) is not only inimical to the pleasure-button-pushing men-
tality of Hollywood or Broadway, but also at odds with the very idea of identity
and meaning. As Howard Barker puts it, in a series of aphoristic statements
entitled ‘Asides for a Tragic Theatre’ (1986, later published 1989):
In tragedy, the audience is disunited...Tragedy is not about reconcilia-
tion...Tragedy offends the sensibilities. It drags the unconscious into the
public place...After the carnival, after the removal of the masks, you are
precisely who you were before. After the tragedy, you are not certain who
you are. (Barker 1989, 13)The tragic 109
Tragedy is offensive, it generates disunity and exposes disharmony. Like
psychoanalytic theory (itself of course crucially indebted to Sophocles’s
Oedipus the King), tragedy makes the unconscious public. It leaves us uncer-
tain about our very identities, uncertain about how we feel, about what has
happened to us.
Finally, there is something apocalyptic about the tragic, not only in the
sense that it consistently entails an experience of unmanageable disorder
but also in that this experience of disorder is linked to a more general kind of
revelation(the meaning of the original Greek word ‘apocalypsis’). The apo-
calyptic revelation at the heart of the tragic has to do with a sense that no
God or gods are looking down on the world to see that justice is done, or that,
if there are gods, they are profoundly careless, indifferent, even sadistic. The
heavens may be occupied or vacant, but the world is terrible and makes no
sense. To illustrate this idea in relation to King Lear, for example, we could
look to a few lines spoken by Albany – addressed to his wife Goneril and
concerned with the ‘vile’ behaviour of herself and her sister Regan towards
their father, the King:
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offenses,
It will come.
Humanity must perforce prey on itself
Like monsters of the deep. (IV, ii, 46–50)
The tragic revelation of King Learconcerns the sense that humanity is indeed
monstrous and that there are no ‘visible spirits’ or any other sort of spirits that
might properly or profitably be called down from the heavens. One of the
shortest, yet perhaps most powerful lines in Shakespeare – ‘It will come’ – is
apocalyptic both in terms of the dark revelation of the idea that there are no
gods or divine justice and in terms of the sense of an impending or accumulat-
ing cataclysm of general destruction and death. The word ‘come’ is crucial
here – as indeed it is in the final passages of several of Shakespeare’s tragedies
– in part because it resonates with the apocalypticism of the end of the Bible:
‘He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so,
come, Lord Jesus’ (Revelation 22:20). Tragedy says ‘come’ in a double sense:
it summons us, it engages our feelings of sympathy and identification, it
demands that our emotions be involved in what is happening. But at the same
time tragedy says: we have to suffer, we are going to die, there is no justice and
there is no afterlife. It, death and cataclysm, will come. In this way, tragedy
engages with the limits of sense, verges on the senseless. Because what tragedy110 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
is about issenseless, meaningless – the unjust and yet unavoidable shattering
of life. This would be another way of trying to highlight the mysterious and
paradoxical nature of the tragic. When Ludovico says, of the bed displaying
the corpses of Othello and Desdemona, ‘Let it be hid’ (Othello, V, ii, 365),
Shakespeare’s play paradoxically conceals or encrypts this intolerable sight
that tragedy calls us to witness. Correspondingly, in King Lear, the death of
Cordelia and Lear’s madness of grief are figured in apocalyptic terms – Kent
asks, ‘Is this the promis’d end?’ and Edgar retorts, ‘Or image of that horror?’
(V, iii, 264–5) – but what the tragedy finally and paradoxically reveals is perhaps
rather the ethical and spiritual horror of a world in which violence, torture and
terror recur unendingly. What is revealed in King Lear, in other words, is the
sense that there is no image of the end except as this unendingness.
With these rather dark thoughts in mind, let us try to say a little more about
the first three elements of a tragedy. First of all, there is the idea of the central
character with whom one strongly sympathizes or identifies. ‘Sympathy’
here entails primarily the idea of ‘entering into another’s feelings or mind’
(Chambers). It carries clear connotations of the original Greek terms ‘syn’,
with, and ‘pathos’, suffering– that is to say, ‘sympathy’ as ‘suffering with’. It is
important to distinguish this from ‘feeling sorry for’. In tragedy, sympathy
with a character is indistinguishable from a logic of identification, of identify-
ing with that character and experiencing and suffering with her or him. The
tragic has to do with a sense of lossof identity – the sense that (in Barker’s
words) ‘you are not certain who you are’. We might try to clarify this a little
more by remarking on the paradoxical nature of sympathy specifically in
relation to drama. Sympathy involves going out of ourselves, and sharing or
identifying with the position of another. Putting it slightly differently, it
involves a sense of going out of ourselves but, at the same time, putting our-
selves on stage. In this respect we have an intriguing example of chiasmus,
which can be formulated as follows: there is no drama without sympathy, but
there is no sympathy without drama. This proposition may also help us to
appreciate why, in historical terms, tragedy has so consistently been associ-
ated with the dramatic. More than any other genre, tragedy explores the limits
of the experience of sympathy, as it broaches self-obliteration and death. In a
manner especially suited to the stage, tragedy is exposure to death – to that
extreme of sympathy or identification where, putting oneself on stage, one
loses a sense of oneself in the scene, in the figure of the one who dies.
It is only on the basis of this first element (sympathy) that the second (the
suffering and death of a character) can be described as tragic. This may seem
logical enough, but the third element of a tragedy is distinctly paradoxical: the
death that occurs at the end of a tragedy is experienced as being at onceThe tragic 111
unavoidable and unjust. This is sometimes talked about as tragic inevitability.
Every tragic work will generate a sense of the inevitable or (to use a term that is
perhaps too easily loaded with religious connotations) the fated. The tragic
invariably concerns a sense of what is foreseeablebut unavoidable. But what is
unavoidable (Desdemona in Othellomust die, Tess in Hardy’s novel must die,
Ikem and Chris in Achebe’s Anthills of the Savannahmust die) is also unac-
ceptable: the tragic seems to involve a peculiar contradiction whereby death is
inevitable and therefore (however painfully) appropriate but at the same time
unjust, unacceptable and therefore inappropriate. Consider, for example, the
moment in the final scene of Hamletwhen Hamlet confides to Horatio: ‘If it be
now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it
will come – the readiness is all’ (V, ii, 220–2). At this moment we, like Horatio,
may not wantHamlet to die, but at the same time it is hard to imagine that there
could be any other outcome to this dark ‘coming’ to ‘readiness’ about which
Hamlet is speaking here.
The paradoxical nature of this third element of the tragic is analogous to
the Aristotelian notion of cartharsis. ‘Catharsis’ is generally understood to
refer to the ‘cleansing’ effect of watching (or reading) a tragedy and to involve
the combination of two kinds of emotion (pity and fear). The cathartic effects
of watching (or reading) are linked to the peculiar fact that tragedy can give
pleasure. Likewise, as we noted earlier, the combination of pity and fear seems
contradictory. After all, how can one feel pity and fear at the same time? If there
were a simple answer to this question we would no longer be thinking within
the terms of the tragic, since the tragic comprises precisely this kind of contra-
dictoriness of feeling. Pity (pathosin ancient Greek) is understood by Aristotle
in terms of a movement towards the spectacle of destruction and death on
stage (or page), while fear or terror (phobosin ancient Greek) is a movement
away from it. In this way, the spectator or reader is torn apart. And it is in this
sense that we can say that the tragic is not rationalizable, rather it is an affront
to our desires for meaning and coherence.
In thinking about a particular drama or other work in terms of the tragic,
then, perhaps the most obvious thing to do in the first instance is to consider
the question of sympathy and/or identification. One could for example think
about such questions as the following: how does a tragic text generate sym-
pathy? Which character or characters elicit our sympathy? What is it that
happensin the text that produces a feeling of sympathy or identification on
our part? It is not only a question of character (what is he or she likeas an indi-
vidual?) and plot (what happens to him or her, the poor sod?) but also, and
more fundamentally, a matter of how character and plot are created in lan-
guage. In short, it is worth trying to think about which particular passages,112 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
speeches, and even phrases or words help to generate sympathy in the specta-
tor or reader. To get a clearer sense of this it may be useful to give an example
in which one might reasonably suppose that sympathy is at work, and to offer
a paraphrase. Take Lady Macbeth’s words of murderous guilt as overheard
by the Doctor and Gentlewoman. (It is, of course, an illustration of the dis-
turbing power of this tragedy that Shakespeare is able to make us sympathize
or identify with a psychopathic murderer.) Lady Macbeth says: ‘Here’s the
smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
hand. O, O, O!’ (V, i, 50–2). Lady Macbeth does notsay: ‘Oh what a bore, this
smelly blood. Not even industrial cleansing fluid will get this off my hands.
Hell, what am I supposed to do?’ There are numerous observations one might
make regarding the extraordinary pathos of Lady Macbeth’s language – in
its Shakespearean form, that is. The first word she says, ‘Here’, is significant
precisely because it draws us into absolute proximity with her. ‘There’ would
have a quite different effect. The deictic ‘Here’ suggests how a play such as
Macbeth establishes and maintains sympathy or identification through the
presentation or indication of psychological interiority, in other words the
inside perspective of a given character’s thoughts and feelings. The ‘smell
of the blood’ and the felt persistency of the word ‘still’ may be mere somnam-
bulistic hallucination, but the spectator or reader is here being presented
with intimate, indeed appalling, knowledge of Lady Macbeth’s thoughts and
sense-impressions. Through the strangeness of soliloquy (the theatrical
device that most explicitly facilitates our access to the interior world of a char-
acter’s thoughts and feelings), we feel in turn the pouring out of guilt in ‘All the
perfumes of Arabia...’ and the stammering nullity of ‘O, O, O!’ We cannot
claim to truly understand or identify with Lady Macbeth (that would be sleep-
walking madness), but her language, pitifully overheard by other characters
and by spectators or readers alike, generates sympathy. Sympathy, in short, is
something that calls to be described and analysed not only at the macro-level
of character and plot but also, and more importantly, at the micro-level of indi-
vidual words, phrases, sentences.
Finally, we could consider the question of the tragic in some of its more
contemporary forms. One can think of many sorts of literary works that are
tragedies of one kind or another – and often showing obvious conformities
with the model we have outlined. But it is also evident that tragedy has under-
gone certain changes in the past century or so. There are various reasons for
this. One reason has to do with the notion of ‘the death of God’. Tragedy, that
is to say, is bound to be different if it is considered, at the outset, from a secular
perspective. Shakespearean tragedy might be said to be modern to the extent
that it seems to dramatize the terrible revelation of a secular and arbitraryThe tragic 113
world, a purposeless universe of suffering and death (countered only by the
quasi-miraculous tenacity of notions of goodness, dignity and justice – with
or without religion). Thomas Hardy’s novels – The Mayor of Casterbridge
(1886), The Woodlanders(1887), Tess of the d’Urbervilles(1891) and Jude the
Obscure(1895), for example – might be regarded as limit-texts in this respect:
they are remarkably close to the sort of model of tragedy that we have outlined
in this chapter but their tragic force consists less in a dramatic revelation that
there is no God or ultimate justice and more in an ironic toying with the very
grounds of such a revelation. If, as Paul Fussell has argued, irony is the ‘domin-
ating form of modern understanding’ (Fussell 1975, 35), this is especially
clear in the sort of ironization of tragedy evident in Thomas Hardy’s work.
The fact that these novels incorporate allusions to what Hardy calls the
Immanent Will, the ‘intangible Cause’ or ‘Unfulfilled Intention’, as well as to
more familiar classical deities, is simply part of this ironization. In terms of
drama itself, there have been quite traditional examples of the tragic – one
might think of Arthur Miller’s great allegorical work, The Crucible(1953), for
example – but more characteristic of the past century have been the kind of
secular tragicomedies of Chekhov or Beckett.
A second reason why tragedy is not what it used to be concerns the trans-
formations that have taken place over the past two hundred years or so regard-
ing notions of the individual and society. If modern tragedies tend to be
about ordinary people rather than kings or queens, they also show how far the
lives of such ‘ordinary people’ are bound up, determined and constrained
by broader social, economic and political realities. One of the first modern
tragedies in European drama, Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll’s House (1879), for
example, is not simply about the break-up of the ‘doll’ Nora’s marriage: it is
about the ways in which the patriarchal institution and conventions of mar-
riage effectively programmethis tragic break-up. Particularly in the wake of
Ibsen’s work, in other words, there is a fundamental shift from a classical idea
of tragedy as inevitable and beyond human control to the modern idea of a
tragedy as something humanly engineered and happening in a world in which
something could and should be done, for instance about sexual inequality,
racism and so on. In his autobiography, Bertrand Russell remarks that ‘One of
the things that makes literature so consoling, is that its tragedies are all in the
past, and have the completeness and repose that comes of being beyond the
reach of our endeavours’ (Russell 1968, 169). Russell’s observation may be
appropriate for thinking about tragedy in its classical modes; but it is quite
inadequate and misleading for thinking about modern tragedy. New histor-
icist and poststructuralist critics, in particular, have been concerned to under-
line what many of the more recent examples of tragic works of literature make114 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
clear, namely that what Russell comfortably refers to as ‘the past’ is precisely
what is in question. And if the past is in question, so is the present. Whose past
are we talking about? From whose perspective? With whose interests at stake?
We could illustrate this by referring briefly to a couple of contempor-
ary works of tragic literature. The first example is a novel about the United
States. Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye (1970) contains the basic elements
of tragedy – even if this includes a modification of Shakespearean ‘suffering
and death’ into Morrisonian ‘suffering and terrible abuse’. It is set in Ohio,
and the narrative begins in 1941. It recounts the story of a young black girl
called Pecola and how she comes to be sexually abused by her grimly named
father, Cholly Breedlove. Morrison’s novel may be set in the past but its power
as a tragic text consists partly in the fact that it is making an explicit political
statement not only about racism in contemporary US society but also about
the perception of history itself. The novel involves a lucid but terrible elabora-
tion of whythis man called Breedlove should have abused his daughter. By
stressing the ways in which Breedlove himself had in the past been racially and
physically abused in turn, Morrison’s novel provides a complex historical
account of racism and violence. The Bluest Eye is tragic but the villain is
paradoxically part of the tragedy. Morrison’s novel broaches a despairing
realism quite foreign to Shakespearean tragedy. King Lear concludes with
Edgar’s words:
The weight of this sad time we must obey,
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say:
The oldest hath borne most; we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long. (V, ii, 324–7)
His words may sound like a hollow formality or formalism – even as they iron-
ically refer to the importance of saying ‘what we feel, not what we ought to
say’ – but there is at least an implicit affirmation here of some kind of future.
Toni Morrison’s novel concludes more blankly: ‘It’s too late. At least on
the edge of my town, among the garbage and the sunflowers of my town, it’s
much, much, much too late’ (190).
The second example is Chinua Achebe’s Anthills of the Savannah(1987).
Achebe’s novel is at once more and less than a tragedy in a classical or
Shakespearean sense. It is set in a semi-fictional present-day African state and
recounts the process by which one of the protagonists, a newspaper editor
called Ikem Osodi, is ‘fatally wounded’ (169) by the military authorities, and
the other male protagonist, the Commissioner for Information, Chris Oriko,
gets shot by a policeman who is apparently about to rape a schoolgirl. The
narrator adopts the perspective of Chris’s lover, the mourning Beatrice:The tragic 115
The explanation of the tragedy of Chris and Ikem in terms of petty human
calculation or personal accident had begun to give way in her throbbing
mind to an altogether more terrifying but more plausible theory of premed-
itation. The image of Chris as just another stranger who chanced upon
death on the Great North Road or Ikem as an early victim of a waxing police
state was no longer satisfactory. Were they not in fact trailed travellers whose
journeys from start to finish had been carefully programmed in advance by
an alienated history? If so, how many more doomed voyagers were already
in transit or just setting out, faces fresh with illusions of duty-free travel and
happy landings ahead of them? (220)
Though in many respects tragic, Anthills of the Savannahsuggests a powerful
circumscription and questioning of classical notions of tragedy – not least
in the light of what Achebe calls ‘an alienated history’. Like Morrison’s The
Bluest Eye, it is an explicitly political novel, directly focusing on the contem-
porary while exploring ways of rethinking the past. Both novels suggest, in
their different ways, the extent to which tragedy is – humanly and unaccept-
ably – ‘carefully programmed’. In its broadest implications, the ‘alienated
history’ to which Achebe’s novel refers is perhaps alien to the very forms
of Western thought, prompting us to reflect on the ways in which ‘history’ and
‘tragedy’ are themselves Western concepts.
Further reading
Aristotle’s Poeticsis the single most important account of tragedy in Western
history. For a rich and stimulating elaboration of Aristotelian notions, see
Elizabeth S. Belfiore’s Tragic Pleasures: Aristotle on Plot and Emotion(1992).
Also on the peculiar relations between the tragic and pleasurable, see A.D.
Nuttall’s Why Does Tragedy Give Pleasure?(1996) and Terry Eagleton’s Sweet
Violence(2003). John Drakakis and Naomi Liebler’s Tragedy(1998) has a very
useful introduction and provides an excellent range of critical material, from
Hegel to Derrida. For a psychoanalytic understanding of tragedy, see André
Green’s now classic The Tragic Effect (1979). Of related interest, Heinz
Politzer’s Freud and Tragedy(2006) explores Freud’s work on and in terms of
the tragic, from Oedipus to Macbeth. For an influential account of how the
sense of the tragic in the modern world has all but disappeared, see George
Steiner’s The Death of Tragedy (1961). And by way of equally influential
riposte, see Raymond Williams’s Modern Tragedy(1969), which vigorously
demonstrates how tragedy has changed and will continue to do so. K.M.
Newton’s Modern Literature and the Tragic(2008) focuses on tragic drama
from Ibsen through to the Theatre of the Absurd and beyond. Rethinking116 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Tragedy, ed. Rita Felski (2008) collects a range of essays on topics from
Euripides to Sebald. Specifically on Shakespeare, Shakespearean Tragedy
(1992), ed. John Drakakis, contains a good deal of valuable critical material,
while Jonathan Dollimore’s Radical Tragedy: Religion, Ideology and Power in
the Drama of Shakespeare and His Contemporaries(3rdedn, 2004) is a fasci-
nating, now classic study.

14. History
What is the relationship between a literary text and history? Broadly
speaking critics have produced four answers to this question:
1. Literary texts belong to no particular time, they are universal and tran-
scend history: the historical context of their production and reception has
no bearing on the literary work which is aesthetically autonomous, having
its own laws, being a world unto itself.
2. The historical context of a literary work – the circumstances surrounding
its production – is integral to a proper understanding of it: the text is pro-
duced within a specific historical context but in its literariness it remains
separate from that context.
3. Literary works can help us to understand the time in which they are set:
realist texts in particular provide imaginative representations of specific
historical moments, events or periods.
4. Literary texts are bound up with other discourses and rhetorical struc-
tures: they are part of a history that is still in the process of being written.
These four models of literature and history characterize various schools
of criticism. The first model is often associated with new criticism or more
generally with formalism, especially influential in literary studies in the middle
decades of the twentieth century. New critics are concerned with literary texts
as artifacts which transcend the contingencies of any particular time or place
and which resist what they see as a reduction of the aesthetic whole to a
specific historical context. Thus, for example, R.S. Crane argues in an essay
first published in 1935 that literary history is essentially part of ‘the general
history of culture’ (Crane 1967, 20), while a ‘program of literary studies based118 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
on criticism’ would focus on ‘imaginative works considered with respect to
those qualities which can truly be said to be timeless...in the sense that they
can be adequately discerned and evaluated in the light of general principles
quite apart from any knowledge of their origin or historical filiation’ (18). The
second model is the kind of approach favoured by philological or what we
might call ‘background’ critics. Such critics are concerned to describe and
analyse literary texts through a consideration of their historical ‘background’,
whether biographical, linguistic, cultural or political. The titles of Basil
Willey’s two classic studies from 1934 and 1940 respectively indicate this
approach: The Seventeenth Century Background: Studies in the Thought
of the Age in Relation to Poetry and Religion and The Eighteenth Century
Background: Studies on the Idea of Nature in the Thought of the Period.For
such critics, knowledge of a literary text’s historical circumstances forms the
basis for an understanding of that text. The third model tends to be associated
more with traditional historical scholarship than with literary criticism, as it
assumes that literary texts are in some respect subordinate to their histor-
ical context. It also tends to assume that literary texts provide undistorted
‘reflections’ of their time. Thus, for example, in his book Religion and the
Decline of Magic(1971), Keith Thomas appeals to Shakespeare’s works on a
number of occasions to justify his arguments. Discussing the practice of curs-
ing, Thomas points out that ‘In Shakespeare’s plays, the curses pronounced
by the characters invariably work’, and argues that this is ‘not just for dramatic
effect’ but that ‘it was a moral necessity that the poor and the injured should be
believed to have this power of retaliation when all else failed’ (Thomas 1971,
507). We might call this model the ‘reflective’ approach. The last model is
associated with a new kind of concern with the historical dimensions of
literary studies particularly since the early 1980s. This model is specifically
associated with new historicist critics in the United States and with cultural
materialist critics in Britain (for convenience, we shall use the term ‘new his-
toricist’ in this chapter to cover both varieties). In both cases, this new interest
in history has been refracted through the concerns of both Marxism and post-
structuralism to produce a complex model of the literary. In this chapter we
shall focus on strategies of reading developed by new historicism in order to
consider ways in which literary texts may be thought about in historical terms.
New historicists argue that to ask about the relationship between literature
and history is the wrong question. The form of the question presupposes that
there is literature on the one side and history on the other. Despite their dif-
ferences, ‘new critics’, ‘background critics’ and ‘reflectionists’ tend to rely on
precisely such a polarity: they assume that the categories of ‘literature’ and
‘history’ are intrinsically separate. They distinguish, more or less explicitly,History 119
between the need for the interpretation of literary texts on the one hand,
and the transparency of history on the other. In an essay entitled ‘Literary
Theory, Criticism, and History’ (1961), for example, René Wellek argues that
‘Literary study differs from historical study in having to deal not with docu-
ments but with monuments’ and that the literary critic ‘has direct access to his
[sic] object’, while the historian ‘has to reconstruct a long-past event on the
basis of eye-witness accounts’ (Wellek 1963, 14–15). For old-historicist
critics, history is not so much textual as more simply a series of empirically
verifiable events. And they also assume that it is possible for our know-
ledge of both historical events and literary texts to be detached and objective,
outside the forces of history.
New historicism may be understood as a reaction against such presupposi-
tions: put briefly, it may be defined as a recognition of the extent to which
history is textual, as a rejection of the autonomy of the literary text and as
an attempted displacement of the objectivity of interpretation in general.
Stephen Greenblatt, the critic who is often seen as the instigator of new his-
toricism, remarks in an essay entitled ‘Toward a Poetics of Culture’ that
‘methodological self-consciousness is one of the distinguishing marks of the
new historicism in cultural studies as opposed to a historicism based upon
faith in the transparency of signs and interpretive procedures’ (Greenblatt
1990a, 158). In the first place, then, new historicism involves a questioning of
the critics’ own position and interpretative procedures. New historicists argue
that the production of literary texts is a cultural practice different only in its
specific mode or formulation from other practices – from furniture-making
to teaching to warfare to printing. According to this reasoning, no absolute
distinction can be made between literary and other cultural practices. As
Stephen Greenblatt puts it, art is ‘made up along with other products, prac-
tices, discourses of a given culture’ (Greenblatt 1988, 13). Literary texts are
embedded within the social and economic circumstances in which they are
produced and consumed. But what is important for new historicists is that
these circumstances are not stable in themselves and are susceptible to being
rewritten and transformed. From this perspective, literary texts are part of
a larger circulation of social energies, both products of and influences on a par-
ticular culture or ideology. What is new about new historicism in particular is
its recognition that history is the ‘history of the present’ (to borrow a phrase
from the godfather of new historicism, Michel Foucault), history is in the
making rather than being monumental and closed, history is radically open to
transformation and rewriting.
New historicists argue that any ‘knowledge’ of the past is necessarily medi-
ated by textsor, to put it differently, that history is in many respects textual.120 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
In this, at least, they are in agreement with Jacques Derrida who declared in Of
Grammatologyin 1967 that ‘The age already in the pastis in fact constituted
in every respect as a text’ (Derrida 1976, lxxxix). A number of major con-
sequences follow from such an assertion. In the first place, there can be no
knowledge of the past without interpretation. (This is also one of the ways
in which new historicism is specifically Nietzschean: as Nietzsche declared
in The Will to Power(1901), ‘facts is precisely what there is not, only inter-
pretations’ (Nietzsche 1968, section 481).) Just as literary texts need to be
read, so do the ‘facts’ ofhistory. Thus, theorists such as Hayden White suggest
that our knowledge of the past is determined by particular narrative configura-
tions – that in talking about the past we tell stories. ‘Properly understood’,
White remarks,
histories ought never to be read as unambiguous signs of the events they
report, but rather as symbolic structures, extended metaphors, that ‘liken’
the events reported in them to some form with which we have already
become familiar in our literary culture...By the very constitution of a set
of events in such a way as to make a comprehensible story out of them, the
historian charges those events with the symbolic significance of a com-
prehensible plot structure. (White 1978, 91–2)
In this respect, the strategies and tools of critical analysis – the consideration
of figures and tropes, a critical awareness of the rhetorical elements of lan-
guage and so on – are as appropriate to a critical study of history as they are
to literary studies.
From a new historicist perspective, any reading of a literary text is a ques-
tion of negotiation, a negotiation between text and reader within the context
of a history or histories that cannot be closed or finalized. Indeed, Stephen
Greenblatt argues that literary works themselves should be understood in
terms of negotiation, rather than in the conventional (Romantic) sense of a
‘pure act of untrammeled creation’ – negotiations which are ‘a subtle, elusive
set of exchanges, a network of trades and trade-offs, a jostling of competing
representations’ (Greenblatt 1988, 7). ‘The work of art’, declares Greenblatt,
‘is the product of a negotiation between a creator or class of creators, equipped
with a complex, communally shared repertoire of conventions, and the insti-
tutions and practices of society’ (Greenblatt 1990a, 158). Greenblatt and
other new historicist critics reject any attempt to produce a ‘whole’ or final
reading and argue for readings which are apparently disjunctive or frag-
mented. Similarly, questioning the boundaries of text and world, of art and
society, such critics work ‘at the margins of the text’ in order to gain ‘insight
into the half-hidden cultural transactions through which great works of art areHistory 121
empowered’ (Greenblatt 1988, 4). A critic might study legal documents, for
example, or arguments concerning the politics of kingship, or handbooks
on the education of children, or accounts of exotic travels and exploration and
so on, in order to get a purchase on a particular work of literature. But such
texts are not to be construed as either the background or the essential key to
understanding the literary text. Rather, like plays, poems and novels, they are
to be understood as texts through which questions of politics and power can
be negotiated.
Such negotiation concerns, not least, our reading. If ‘history’ necessarily
entails interpretation, then such acts of reading will themselves be embedded
within a particular social and cultural situation. There is no escape from his-
tory even if this history is regarded as multiple and in a process of unceasing
transformation. New historicism argues that we are inescapably implicated –
even in the fantasy of academic objectivity and detachment – in structures and
strategies of power. Power is produced and reproduced in research, teaching
and learning as it is in any other practice or discourse. As Michel Foucault
remarked in his 1976 Introduction to The History of Sexuality, power is
‘omnipresent’. It is as ‘the moving substrate of force relations which, by virtue
of their inequality, constantly engender states of power’, states of power which
are, however, ‘always local and unstable’. ‘Power’, Foucault goes on, ‘is every-
where’ (Foucault 1981, 93).
In order to consider how such an approach might work in practice, we
propose to discuss a poem by the English Romantic poet William Wordsworth
entitled ‘Alice Fell, or Poverty’. The poem was written on the 12th and 13th
March 1802, and first published in 1807. It is a seemingly uncomplicated
account of an incident that was recounted to Wordsworth by his friend Robert
Grahame. As the subtitle indicates, the poem presents itself as an allegory
concerning poverty:
The Post-boy drove with fierce career,
For threat’ning clouds the moon had drowned;
When suddenly I seemed to hear
A moan, a lamentable sound.
5 As if the wind blew many ways
I heard the sound, and more and more:
It seemed to follow with the Chaise,
And still I heard it as before.
At length I to the Boy called out,
10 He stopped his horses at the word;122 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
But neither cry, nor voice, nor shout,
Nor aught else like it could be heard.
The Boy then smacked his whip, and fast
The horses scampered through the rain;
15 And soon I heard upon the blast
The voice, and bade him halt again.
Said I, alighting on the ground,
‘What can it be, this piteous moan?’
And there a little Girl I found,
20 Sitting behind the Chaise, alone.
‘My Cloak!’ the word was last and first,
And loud and bitterly she wept,
As if her very heart would burst;
And down from off the Chaise she leapt.
25 ‘What ails you, Child?’ She sobbed, ‘Look here!’
I saw it in the wheel entangled,
A weather beaten Rag as e’er
From any garden scare-crow dangled.
’Twas twisted betwixt nave and spoke;
30 Her help she lent, and with good heed
Together we released the Cloak;
A wretched, wretched rag indeed!
‘And wither are you going, Child,
Tonight along these lonesome ways?’
35 ‘To Durham’ answered she half wild –
‘Then come with me into the chaise.’
She sate like one past all relief;
Sob after sob she forth did send
In wretchedness, as if her grief
40 Could never, never, have an end.
‘My child, in Durham do you dwell?’
She checked herself in her distress,
And said, ‘My name is Alice Fell;
I’m fatherless and motherless.History 123
45 And I to Durham, Sir, belong.’
And then, as if the thought would choke
Her very heart, her grief grew strong;
And all was for her tattered Cloak.
The chaise drove on; our journey’s end
50 Was nigh; and, sitting by my side,
As if she’d lost her only friend
She wept, nor would be pacified.
Up to the Tavern-door we post;
Of Alice and her grief I told;
55 And I gave money to the Host,
To buy a new Cloak for the old.
‘And let it be a duffil grey,
As warm a cloak as man can sell!’
Proud Creature was she the next day,
60 The little Orphan, Alice Fell!
From a new historicist perspective we might try to situate this poem in relation
to other contemporary discourses which deal with poverty, charity and prop-
erty. We could, for example, investigate the rhetorical strategies and discursive
conventions of debates surrounding the Poor Law, economics, poverty and
charity at the turn of the nineteenth century. One such text is Adam Smith’s
The Wealth of Nations, first published in 1776 and perhaps the most influen-
tial work of political economy of the time. In this book, Smith twice refers to
beggars, once when he argues that ‘Before the invention of the art of printing,
a scholar and a beggar seem to have been terms very nearly synonymous’
(Smith 1986, 237), and once when he considers beggars as the only people
who do not take part in the circulation of exchange and barter. In this latter
passage, from the second chapter of his multi-volume work, Smith argues that
there is ‘a certain propensity in human nature’ which is ‘to truck, barter,
and exchange one thing for another’ (117). It is this ‘propensity’ which distin-
guishes humans from animals: ‘When an animal wants to obtain something
either of a man or of another animal, it has no other means of persuasion but to
gain the favour of those whose service it requires’ (118). But humans – unlike
animals, consistently dependent on others – cannot constantly expect others’
benevolence. Instead, a man must ‘interest [another person’s] self-love in his
favour’: ‘Nobody but a beggar chooses to depend chiefly upon the bene-
volence of his fellow-citizens’ (118–19). Although Smith goes on to say that124 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
even beggars take part in the circulation of monetary exchange by buying
goods with the money that they are given, in this extraordinary passage he has
managed to dehumanize beggars, to put them outside of humanity, on the level
of the animal. By arguing that human relations are relations of exchange, based
on the principle of ‘self-love’, however, Smith suggests an apparent paradox in
the discourse of charity: he claims that ‘the charity of well-disposed people’
supplies the beggar with ‘the whole fund of his subsistence’ (119), but does
not explain whysuch people should give to beggars. According to his own
arguments, people would only give to beggars if they were to gain something
in return. There is, in this sense, no pure gift, no possibility of a gift. A num-
ber of significant rhetorical manoeuvres, then, may be seen to be at work
in Smith’s discourse of charity and begging. In the first place, beggars are
dehumanized. Secondly, charity becomes a paradoxical or perverse, even an
impossible act. Thirdly, by saying ‘a beggar choosesto depend’, Smith implies
freedom of choice where economic necessity may be at stake. Finally, and most
generally, Smith makes it clear that questions of charity and begging are part of
a larger discourse of property and the exchange of property, indeed, part of a
specific ideology of free-market liberalism.
We might think about these points in relation to Wordsworth’s poem for,
although Alice Fell does not actually beg and is not referred to as a beggar,
the poem puts her in the position of a beggar and is specifically concerned
with that particular kind of exchange of property named ‘charity’. What we
might then seek to do is not to produce a thematic reading of the poem: rather,
we might consider how the rhetorical strategies at work in Smith’s account
of beggars, property and charity are reproduced and transformed in those of
the poem.
We might start by thinking about ways in which the poem articulates
questions of property. Property in ‘Alice Fell’ is not simply a question of the
cloak, but of poetry itself as property. The very origins of the narrative are
bound up with questions of ownership in that the story originated with
Wordsworth’s friend Robert Grahame. Moreover, Dorothy Wordsworth, the
poet’s sister, wrote an account of the same incident in her journal before
Wordsworth wrote his poem. Dorothy’s account goes as follows:
Mr. Graham said he wished Wm had been with him the other day – he was
riding in a post chaise and he heard a strange cry that he could not under-
stand, the sound continued and he called to the chaise driver to stop. It was
a little girl that was crying as if her heart would burst. She had got up behind
the chaise and her cloak had been caught by the wheel and was jammed in
and it hung there. She was crying after it. Poor thing. Mr. Graham took herHistory 125
into the chaise and the cloak was released from the wheel but the child’s
misery did not cease for her cloak was torn to rags; it had been a miserable
cloak before, but she had no other and it was the greatest sorrow that could
befal her. Her name was Alice Fell. She had no parents, and belonged to
the next Town. At the next Town Mr. G. left money with some respectable
people in the town to buy her a new cloak. (Wordsworth 1984, 702)
As with a number of William’s most famous lyrics, ‘Alice Fell’ resembles
Dorothy’s journalistic account in many ways: both poem and journal entry
are concerned with the strangeness of the girl’s cry, with the girl’s continuing
misery, with the ragged state of her cloak. More specifically, there are numer-
ous verbal echoes of the journal entry in William’s poem, most strikingly,
the poem’s ‘she wept, / As if her heart would burst’ and the journal’s ‘crying as
if her heart would burst’. In this respect, William may be said to have appro-
priated the story from his friend and from his sister. This leads us to the ques-
tion of what property it is that constitutes this text as a poem. Is it properly
a poem? How is it different from Grahame’s oral account or from Dorothy’s
journal entry? And where does the poem originate, who owns it and author-
izes it? We might want to follow these questions through to an investigation of
the institution of literature itself. How is the canon produced, for example,
what factors are at work in canon-formation in England such that women’s
diaries have tended to be excluded, canonically marginalized? Can it be said
that in choosing the form of the journal-entry to record the story Dorothy is
excluding herself from the public discourse of literature? How is Dorothy’s
account both reproduced and effaced in William’s poem and in the critical
tradition, and why? Rather differently, we could argue that Dorothy’s diary
entry is not simply supplementary to the poem but is an essential part of it.
Indeed, it becomes difficult to distinguish property as regards the cloak and
property as regards the Wordsworths. In these respects, questions of property
cannot be considered to be simply the context or the thematic focus of the
poem: the poem originates in certain problematic exchanges, transfers or
gifts of narrative property.
The poem is also ‘about’ an exchange of property. The girl loses her cloak
in the wheel of the carriage, and the speaker gives her enough money to buy a
new one. But along with this exchange go a series of property disturbances.
The girl’s proper name, Alice Fell, for example, is curious. It is not a name
Wordsworth invented, it seems. But is it ‘historical’ or ‘literary’? The poem,
indeed, exacerbates the sense of uncertainty regarding the strange properties
of this proper name. Not only is it transferred from the title to the main body of
the poem, or from the girl to the poem, but it also has a curious grammatical126 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
status in itself: it is suspended between a name and a minimal sentence,
a kind of mini-narrative in itself – Alice fell. The poem is not only called
‘Alice Fell’, but is also about the fall of Alice. And once we recognize that
there is something strange about the girl’s name, we might also notice that
‘Alice Fell’ is haunted by the figure of a ‘fallen woman’, a woman outside
‘respectable’ society. Dorothy’s text seems to pick up on this in its use of
the verb ‘befal’, just prior to naming the girl herself. Conversely, we may recall
that ‘fell’ also means the skin or hide of an animal, so that Alice might be like
her cloak, a kind of rag, caught up and torn apart by the moving carriage.
Finally, ‘fell’ as ‘wild’, as ‘fierce, savage, cruel, ruthless, dreadful, terrible’ or
‘intensely painful’ and even (of poison) ‘deadly’, or ‘shrewd, clever, cunning’
(OED) gives us a sense of the outcast, inhuman, dangerous, improper nature
of this figure, and perhaps partly explains her – and the poem’s – haunt-
ing power: she is, as the narrator himself declares, ‘half wild’ (l.35). The
dehumanization at work in Adam Smith’s account of beggars is also wildly
at work in Wordsworth’s poem.
If the poem is about the exchange of property, it is also about the question
of charity. Every act of charity may be understood as an implicit assertion that
the end of suffering is possible. Dorothy’s account of the incident recognizes
that, after the girl’s cloak was released, her ‘misery did not cease’. One of the
key stanzas of Wordsworth’s poem in this respect is stanza 10:
She sate like one past all relief;
Sob after sob she forth did send
In wretchedness, as if her grief
Could never, never, have an end.
The phrases ‘like’ and ‘as if’ seem to deny the unspeakable possibility that the
girl really is ‘past all relief’, and that her ‘grief / Could never, never, have an
end’. But much of the force of the poem may be said to reside precisely in this
terrifying possibility – that nothing can be done, that charity cannot finally
help. In this respect, it is significant that unlike Dorothy’s account, the poem
ends in a blustering statement of self-satisfaction: in the final stanza, the girl
is said to be ‘proud’ on account of her new cloak. But the girl’s poverty and
orphanhood remain and the pride appears to be as much a projection of the
speaker’s emotions as the girl’s. The speakerapparently does have reason to be
proud – he can feel proud of his charitable action. Attributing pride to the girl
simply increases the speaker’s own reasons to be proud. It might be argued
that the poem works against itself, implicitly exposing the self-deceptive
nature of the charitable act. Given this logic of projection, the poem clearlyHistory 127
suggests that self-deception is necessary to charity or that, in Adam Smith’s
terms, there is no pure gift, that in giving the cloak, the speaker receives the
satisfaction of pride. Moreover, the poem’s triumphant ending implies that
charity can end suffering. But this sense of triumph and of an ending are
simultaneously undone: we must give and to do so we must believe that our gift
will help to end suffering, but suffering is never-ending. The hardly audible,
ghostly historical counter-voice of the poem cries that, as an orphan, Alice
Fell cannot but suffer (etymologically, ‘orphan’ means ‘one who has lost’). Her
suffering is never-ending because it cannot be ended. Unlike the speaker, who
is on a journey that will end (see line 49, ‘our journey’s end’), the suffering of
Alice Fell has no end. Just as the speaker is haunted by a strange voice at the
beginning of the poem, so he is haunted by the uncanny disembodied voice
of suffering, haunted by what he knows but cannot know – that suffering and
the improper or ‘fell’ (wild, inhuman, fallen) disturbances of property are
never-ending.
Stephen Greenblatt argues that culture ‘is a particular network of negotia-
tions for the exchange of material goods, ideas, and – through institutions like
enslavement, adoption, or marriage – people’. Greenblatt also contends that
‘Great writers are precisely masters of these codes, specialists in cultural
exchange’ (Greenblatt 1990b, 229–30). Our account has sought to locate
Wordsworth’s poem in relation to the discourses of property and charity as
articulated in one particular text. Wordsworth, we might say, is a master of –
and is mastered by – the codes of property and charity. New historicism seeks
to explore such mastery, while remaining alert to ways in which such codes
continue to play themselves out in the discourses of the present – including,
not least, the discourses of history and criticism.
Further reading
For eloquent and readable accounts of a historicized theory of culture, see
Stephen Greenblatt’s essays ‘Towards a Poetics of Culture’ (1990a) and
‘Culture’ (1990b). See his Shakespearean Negotiations(1988) and Marvelous
Possessions(1991) for witty and penetrating readings of various Renaissance
texts, and for overviews of his work, see Mark Robson, Stephen Greenblatt
(2008), and Michael Payne, ed., The Greenblatt Reader(2005). Useful collec-
tions of new historicist and cultural materialist essays include Catherine
Gallagher and Greenblatt’s Practising New Historicism (2000), Dollimore
and Sinfield, eds, Political Shakespeare (1994), Wilson and Dutton, eds,
New Historicism and Renaissance Drama (1992), Veeser, ed., The New
Historicism (1989) and The New Historicism Reader (1994), Ryan, ed.,128 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
New Historicism and Culture Materialism(1996), and Tamsin Spargo, ed.,
Reading the Past(2000). For a good but demanding overview of historicisms
old and new, see Paul Hamilton’s Historicism(1996). For a sharp and engag-
ing account of new historicism and cultural materialism, see Brannigan, New
Historicism and Cultural Materialism(1998); and see Scott Wilson, Cultural
Materialism(1995). Todd, Feminist Literary History(1988) provides a valu-
able feminist account of literary history. On Foucault, see Sara Mills, Michel
Foucault(2003) and Gary Gutting, Foucault(2005).

15. Me
Who are we? What am I? What is an ‘I’? What does it mean to say ‘me’?
What is the relationship between an ‘I’ in a literary text and an ‘I’ out-
side it? One of the central ideas of this book is literature’s capacity to question,
defamiliarize and even transform the sense of who or what we are. In the next
few pages we would like to elaborate further on this, by trying to look at the
nature of personal identity or ‘me’ both in broadly historical and theoretical
terms and more specifically in terms of what literary texts themselves suggest.
In Flannery O’Connor’s story ‘Revelation’ (1961) a woman called Mrs
Turpin has a traumatic and bizarre reaction when a strange girl sitting in a
doctor’s waiting room tells her: ‘Go back to hell where you came from, you old
wart hog’ (217). Mrs Turpin is scandalized by this statement and that same
evening, back at the farm, by herself, hosing down the pigs, she demands an
explanation. Being Christian and superstitious (as well as grotesquely racist
and class-prejudiced), Mrs Turpin regards the girl’s words as a message from
God:
‘What do you send me a message like that for?’ she said in a low fierce voice,
barely above a whisper but with the force of a shout in its concentrated fury.
‘How am I a hog and me both?’ (222)
What is striking here is not only the woman’s confusion and indignation at the
apparently contradictory idea that she might be a human being and an old wart
hog at the same time, but also the fact that her ‘fury’ is expressed in a direct,
personal address to God. Mrs Turpin’s sense of outrage becomes outrageous
in turn, as her questions addressed to God culminate in a questioning ofGod:
‘A final surge of fury shook her and she roared, “Who do you think you are?”’130 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
(223) The strangeness of putting this question to God comes from the fact that
it is a question that should properly, perhaps, only be asked of another human.
Only humans are supposed to be able to reflect on who they are and at the
same time be obliged to take seriously a questioning of their own identity. If
the question ‘Who do you think you are?’ is one that cannot or should not be
asked of God, nor is it a question one would normally ask of a wart hog. In this
respect it would seem that there is something characteristically human about
the question. ‘Who do you think you are?’ is the question that humans ask of
others and try to answer about themselves. As Socrates said, ‘The unexam-
ined life is not worth living’ (Plato 1961, (Apology, 38a)). And the definition of
being human must remain in the form of a questioning: Mrs Turpin’s ‘concen-
trated fury’ is, in this respect, pitifully, comically human.
At the same time, it could be said that this question (‘Who do you think you
are?’) is most clearly raised and most fully explored in works ofliterature. This
might in fact allow us to formulate another general definition: literature is
the space in which questions about the nature of personal identity are most
provocatively articulated. For many decades literary critics have talked about
‘the person’ and ‘the individual’. In more recent years, however, there has
been a tendency to refer to ‘the human subject’ or just ‘the subject’. This may
sound jargonistic but there are good reasons, in fact, for talking about ‘the
subject’ rather than, say, ‘the person’ or ‘the individual’. The French post-
structuralist Michel Foucault has written: ‘There are two meanings of the
word “subject”: subject to someone else by control and dependence, and tied
to one’s own identity by a conscience or self-knowledge’ (Foucault 1983,
212, cited by During 1992, 153). The word ‘person’, by contrast, perhaps
too easily retains connotations of the ‘I’ or ‘me’ as detached from everything,
a free agent. Likewise, the term ‘individual’ (etymologically from the Latin
individuus, ‘undivided’ or ‘not divisible’) suggests a sense of the ‘I’ as simply
free, as being at one with itself and autonomous or self-ruling. It is this idea of
the sovereignty of the ‘I’ that Freud gestures towards and ironizes when he
speaks of ‘His Majesty the Ego’ (Freud 1985f, 138).
The term ‘subject’ is useful, then, in that it encourages a more critical atten-
tiveness to the ways in which the ‘I’ is notautonomous, to the fact that it does
not exist in a sort of vacuum. Rather an ‘I’ or ‘me’ is always subjectto forces
and effects both outside itself (environmental, social, cultural, economic,
educational, etc.) and ‘within’ itself (in particular in terms of what is called
the unconscious or, in more recent philosophical terms, otherness). We are
subjects in the sense of being ‘subject to’ others ‘by control or dependence’ (in
Foucault’s phrase) right from birth and even before: not only are we radically
dependent on the father who sires us and the mother who bears us (or on theirMe 131
various surrogates), but also on the environment (ecological, economic,
familial, social, etc.) into which we are born, as well as on the multiple forms of
authority and government which condition our upbringing. A ‘me’ born to a
single mother in Soweto is not the same kind of‘me’ as a ‘me’ born to a duchess
in Kensington, but they are both in their different ways subjects. Of course if
the Kensington ‘me’ had been in line for the throne, things would have looked
slightly different: in Britain, at least, one is subject not only to the authority of
one’s parent or parents, one’s local authorities, the police and central govern-
ment, but also – at least on paper – to the Queen (thus one is ‘a British subject’)
and, beyond her, to the Christian God. That, then, is one way in which every
‘I’ is necessarily and fundamentally a subject. Rather differently, being a sub-
ject has specifically to do with language. You cannot be an ‘I’ without having a
proper name, and in English-speaking countries you usually acquire a proper
name around the time of birth or even before. We are born into language, we
are born – more precisely – into patriarchal language, into being identified by
a patronym, by a paternal proper name. (Even the mother’s maiden name is, of
course, a patronym.) We are also endowed with a forename and again this is
not something wechoose, it is something to which we are subject– even if, in
Britain for example, people do legally have the right to change their names at
the age of 18. Juliet’s complaint is haunting and even tragic precisely because
it highlights the way in which we are subject tonames, even if we wish to ignore
or disown them:
Oh Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.
(Romeo and Juliet, II, ii, 33–6)
More broadly, questions of personal or individual identity are indissoci-
ably bound up with language. We may like to suppose that there is some ‘me’
outside language or that there is some way of thinking about ourselves which
involves a non-linguistic ‘me’. But the idea of this non-linguistic ‘me’ must
found itself in language – beginning with the name itself, or with the words
‘I’, ‘me’, ‘mine’, ‘myself’ and so on. We cannot, in any meaningfulway, escape
the fact that we are subject tolanguage. As Jacques Derrida has put it: ‘From
the moment that there is meaning there are nothing but signs. We think only
in signs’ (Derrida 1976, 50).
We can also consider this topic from a more explicitly historical perspec-
tive. The idea of the ‘I’ or ‘me’, in other words, is not unchanging and132 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
unchangeable. It is in many respects historically and ideologically deter-
mined. The way we think about ‘I’ today is inevitably different from the way in
which ‘I’ was thought about and defined in, say, seventeenth-century France
by René Descartes. The principle of the Cartesian cogito(‘I think therefore
I am’) – that is to say, the model of the rational subjectwhich Descartes theor-
izes in his Discourse on Method(1637; 1977) – in many respects continues
to govern Western thinking. But there are other ways of thinking, and other
ways of thinking about thinking. In the mid-twentieth century, for example,
the German philosopher Martin Heidegger declared: ‘Thinking begins
only when we have come to know that reason, glorified for centuries, is the
most stiffnecked adversary of thought’ (Heidegger 1977, 112, cited by
Judovitz 1988, 186). Likewise, and more recently, Jacques Derrida has been
consistently concerned to demonstrate that, as he puts it: ‘reason is only one
species of thought – which does not mean that thought is “irrational”’
(Derrida 1983, 16).
But perhaps the most obvious way of illustrating the changes over the past
century in thinking about thinking, and in thinking about the model of the
rational subject, is in terms of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis has changed
the way in which we are obliged to think about ‘the subject’. In the light of the
psychoanalytic theory of the unconscious, the proposition ‘cogito, ergo sum’
(‘I think, therefore I am’) becomes manifestly problematic. I do not, and per-
haps strictly speaking never can, know precisely why or how I think what
I think, if only because of the extent to which what I think is necessarily deter-
mined by forces and effects of which I am (in many ways thankfully) unaware.
In a short essay written as an encyclopedia entry on ‘Psychoanalysis’ first pub-
lished in 1923, Freud suggests that the unconscious is evident not only in
dreams but in
such events as the temporary forgetting of familiar words and names, for-
getting to carry out prescribed tasks, everyday slips of the tongue and of the
pen, misreadings, losses and mislayings of objects, certain errors, instances
of apparently accidental self-injury, and finally habitual movements carried
out seemingly without intention or in play, tunes hummed ‘thoughtlessly’,
and so on. (Freud 1986, 136–7)
The significance of Freud’s theory of the unconscious thus consists in the
demonstration that the subject who thinks (the subject of ‘I think’) is com-
posed of forces and effects which are at least in part unconscious. ‘I’,
let us remind ourselves, is not ‘God’ – even if it may be subject to fantasies
of being so.Me 133
Psychoanalysis, then, has been a particularly disturbing but valuable dis-
course because it has promoted an awareness of the extent to which any ‘I’ or
human subject is decentred: I, in other words, can never be simply or precisely
who or what I think. What makes this idea disturbing and at the same time
valuable is that it involves a dislocation of notions of human mastery and
autonomy of self. It introduces instead the humility of recognizing that
the human subject is not centred in itself, let alone centred in relation to the
surrounding world or solar system. In an essay on ‘The Resistances to
Psychoanalysis’ (1925), Freud talks about the ‘emotional’ difficulties people
have in accepting the ideas of psychoanalysis and draws analogies between
this and the theories of Darwin and Copernicus. In the case of psychoanalysis,
he says, ‘powerful human feelings are hurt by the subject-matter of the theory.
Darwin’s theory of descent met with the same fate, since it tore down the
barrier that had been arrogantly set up between men and beasts.’ Freud goes
on to suggest that ‘the psychoanalytic view of the relation of the conscious ego
to an overpowering unconscious was a severe blow to human self-love’, and
that, ‘as the psychological blow to men’s narcissism’, it compares ‘with the
biological blow delivered by the theory of descent and the earlier cosmolo-
gicalblow aimed at it by the discovery of Copernicus’ (Freud 1986, 272–3).
In this sense, psychoanalysis complements the Copernican revolution and
nineteenth-century evolutionary theory in providing a powerful critique of
anthropocentric or humanist values and ideas. Psychoanalysis demonstrates
in uncomfortably clear terms how the ‘arrogance’ or narcissism of anthro-
pocentrism – that is to say, every kind of thinking, including every kind of
philosophy and politics, which puts the human at the centre of the earth and
solar system, if not of the universe – is both unwarranted and unsustainable.
The Cartesian ‘I think, therefore I am’ can be further considered specifically
in relation to language. Language determines the ‘I’ and the ‘I think’. This can
be illustrated simply by reflecting on the idea that Descartes’s formulation
was first published in Latin (‘cogito, ergo sum’). We anglophone subjects are
already adrift in effects of language and translation, but so too was Descartes
himself: after all, his works appeared not in some form of seventeenth-century
French but in a foreign, ‘dead’ language. He was subject to the scholarly
protocols of his own time and the requirement to write (and in some sense
presumably think) in Latin. What is at stake in this logic of being subject to
language is a conception of language as not simply instrumental: language
is not simply something that we use. Language governs what we (can) say as
much as we govern or uselanguage. Language is not simply an instrument: we
are, unavoidably, agentsof language. Moreover we are, more precisely perhaps,
secret or double agents of language: we do not necessarily know, from one134 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
moment to the next, howwe are being used by language or where it might be
leading us. As in the most compelling kind of espionage story, however, this is
not a situation we can get out of. As the narrator neatly puts it, in Margaret
Atwood’s short story ‘Giving Birth’ (1977): ‘These are the only words I have,
I’m stuck with them, stuck in them’ (225–6). The ‘in’ is, no doubt, more
difficult to reflect on than the ‘with’, but it is no less important.
How do these various questions and ideas relate to literary works more
generally? First of all, let us emphasize that, if literature is concerned with
exploring and reflecting on the nature of personal identity, it is also a space of
exhilarating, even anarchic openness and imaginative or transformational
possibility. Literature can be thought of as being, in Derrida’s words, ‘the
institution which allows one to say everything, in every way’ (Derrida 1992a,
36). In particular, there is this astonishing, anarchic freedom in literature: at
least in principle, the author of a literary work can be any ‘I’ he or she wishes
to. To put it like this is to imply that the author is an ‘I’ before or outside the
literary work. But who is to say that there is an ‘I’ anywhere that is not in part
literary? This rather strange question is a focus of one of the greatest comical
literary or philosophical works in the twentieth century, Samuel Beckett’s The
Unnamable(first published in English in 1959). This text is preoccupied with
the idea that it is the ‘I’ itself that is in a sense the unnamable: the ‘I’ that speaks,
or that seems to speak, is never true, never precisely itself, never the same, for
example, as the ‘I’ who has spoken or the ‘I’ that writes ‘I’. The Unnamable,
then, starts off from the apparently simple but perhaps unfathomable remark,
‘I, say I’, and from the paradox that ‘I seem to speak, it is not I, about me, it is
not about me’ (293). Nearly 50 pages later the narrator is still impelled to
observe that ‘on the subject of me properly so called...so far as I know I have
received no information up to date’ (338). In Beckett’s wonderfully funny, but
also dark and unnerving text, the Cartesian-rationalistic ‘I think’ becomes:
‘I only think, if that is the name for this vertiginous panic as of hornets smoked
out of their nest, once a certain degree of terror has been exceeded’ (353). As
with so much of Beckett’s writing, this sentence is at once quite straight-
forward and semantically dense, unsettling, surprisingly resistant to a single
interpretation. We might note, for example, the explicit attention to the uncer-
tainties of language (‘if that is the name’) and of the relationship between
terror and thinking. To think about this sentence can induce vertiginous
panic and become terrifying. It succinctly illustrates literature’s complex and
unsettling effects when it comes to thinking about thinking – when it comes
to thinking about identity and about the ‘I’ that claims to think.
We could conclude by trying to say a little more about the ways in which, as
we suggested earlier, the ‘I’ or ‘me’ is in fact historically determined. One veryMe 135
broad but decisive example of this would be the question of the ‘I’ or ‘me’
in relation to romantic and post-romantic literature. In Of Grammatology
(1967), Derrida argues that the importance of Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s work
consists in the fact that he ‘starts from a new model of presence: the subject’s
self-presence within consciousnessor feeling’ (Derrida 1976, 98). European
Romanticism in general might be characterized in terms of this kind of
‘new model of presence’, and in particular in terms of a new emphasis on
the centrality and importance of the ‘I’ as a subject who both thinks and feels.
This could be exemplified by a celebrated stanza written by George Gordon
Byron on the back of a manuscript-page of canto 1 of Don Juan(1819–24):
I would to heaven that I were so much clay,
As I am blood, bone, marrow, passion, feeling –
Because at least the past were pass’d away –
And for the future – (but I write this reeling,
Having got drunk exceedingly to-day,
So that I seem to stand upon the ceiling)
I say – the future is a serious matter –
And so – for God’s sake – hock and soda-water!
The poet situates himself and the very act of writing in the comical immediacy
of being drunk and feeling as if he is upside-down, standing on the ceiling.
The new emphasis on the ‘I’ in romantic culture is consistently articulated
in terms of the polarity or gulf between a subject (‘I feel’) and an object (the
clouds, a skylark, a nightingale). The (impossible) desire for a fusion between
subject and object (the idea for example of being, in Matthew Arnold’s
words, ‘in harmony with nature’) is one of the most striking characteristics of
the work of the English romantic poets. It is clear, for instance, in Keats’s ‘Ode
to a Nightingale’, in which the speaker is eventually compelled to admit defeat
in his attempt to fuse or dissolve into the nightingale’s song: the word ‘forlorn’
is ‘like a bell / To toll me back from thee to my sole self’. This emphasis on the
‘sole self’ broaches the notion of solipsism – that is to say the refusal or inabil-
ity to believe in the reality of anything outside or beyond the self. The idea of
such an isolation of the self has its representatives in classical philosophy and
literature, but it is particularly pervasive in nineteenth- and twentieth-century
European culture. It is evoked by the pathos, or bathos, of the opening lines of
Matthew Arnold’s poem, ‘To Marguerite – Continued’ (1849):
Yes! in the sea of life enisled,
With echoing straits between us thrown,136 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Dotting the shoreless watery wild,
We mortal millions live alone.
It is also implicit in the work of Freud, to the extent that psychoanalysis sug-
gests that everything comes down to the power and significance of projection,
of the qualities, moods or emotions which we project on topeople and things.
Wallace Stevens sums this up when he says:
few people realize on that occasion, which comes to all of us, when we look
at the blue sky for the first time, that is to say: not merely see it, but look at
it and experience it...– few people realize that they are looking at the
world of their own thoughts and the world of their own feelings. (Stevens
1951, 65–6)
But as we hope will by now be clear, solipsism is a myth, a delusion or mirage.
Solipsism presupposes the idea of something like what Wittgenstein calls a
private language (Wittgenstein 1984). There is no such thing as a private lan-
guage: the phrase ‘private language’ is an oxymoron. Language is social or,
at least, language comes from elsewhere, from others and from otherness in
general. Even to say, as a self-avowed solipsist might, ‘I do not believe in the
reality of anything apart from myself’, is to demonstrate a dependence on what
is not ‘me’, not oneself. It is to demonstrate that one is subject tolanguage. As
the voice, or one of the voices, in The Unnamableputs it: ‘I’m in words, made
of words, others’ words...’ (390).
Literature, like art more generally, has always been concerned with aspects
of what can be called the unconscious or ‘not me’ or other: it is and has always
been centrally concerned with dreams and fantasy, hallucinations and visions,
madness, trance, and other kinds of impersonality or absences of self. But we
could say that romantic and post-romantic literature has been increasingly
sensitive to the role of otherness and increasingly aware of what might be
described as our responsibilitiesin relation to otherness. Beckett’s writing is per-
haps only the most philosophically refined recent example of post-Romantic
literature which is concerned to explore, deflate and transform our under-
standing of the question, ‘Who do you think you are?’ In this respect his work
might be seen to anticipate and encapsulate much of what is called poststruc-
turalism. Poststructuralism demonstrates that the ‘I’ or human subject is neces-
sarily decentred. It argues against the reductiveness (and even the possibility)
of rationalism, in particular through its attention to what is other (though not
simply ‘irrational’) as regards Western ‘rational’ thinking. And it persistently
shows up the presumptuousness of the model of an autonomous, supposedlyMe 137
masterful human being, and thus points beyond ‘merely’ literary questions,
exposing the barbarities of anthropocentrism in general. Some of this may be
felt in a faltering, haunting few words from The Unnamable:
if only I knew if I’ve lived, if I live, if I’ll live, that would simplify everything,
impossible to find out, that’s where you’re buggered, I haven’t stirred, that’s
all I know, no, I know something else, it’s not I, I always forget that, I
resume, you must resume... (417)
Further reading
For some very clear and stimulating introductory accounts of psychoanalysis
and its implications for ‘me’, see Freud 1986; for a complex and challenging
analysis of Freudian thinking on the idea of the subject, see Borch-Jacobsen,
The Freudian Subject(1988). For a careful and thought-provoking discussion
of the human subject from the perspective of the social sciences, see Paul Hirst
and Penny Woolley, Social Relations and Human Attributes(1982). A highly
influential account of romanticism stressing the importance of conflicts and
disjunctions between subject and object, me and the world, etc., is M.H.
Abram’s classic study, The Mirror and the Lamp(1953). Another influential
discussion of these issues, this time from the perspective of the history of
philosophy (particularly from Descartes to the Romantic period) is Charles
Taylor’s wide-ranging and informative Sources of the Self(1989). For two very
good general accounts of poststructuralism, see Robert Young’s Introduc-
tion to Untying the Text(1981) and Josué Harari’s Introduction to Textual
Strategies(1979); and see Joel Fineman’s The Subjectivity Effect in Western
Literary Tradition(1991) for a theoretically and critically astute exploration
of such issues in a number of literary (especially Shakespearean) texts. For a
challenging but compelling recent work that explores the nature of the self in
the context of psychoanalysis, violence and the value of what they call ‘imper-
sonal narcissism’, see Leo Bersani and Adam Phillips’s Intimacies(2008).

16. Eco
Why in the world would we destroy the world in which we live, our own
world, our only world? What drives that destruction? Why can’t we
stop it?
William Wordsworth’s ‘Nutting’ (1800) cannot answer these questions;
perhaps no poem could. But this 54-line poem might help us to begin to think
about them, and about questions of human-environmental interaction and
ecological destruction and the ways in which literary study in recent years
has started to be transformed by such concerns. In ‘Nutting’, the speaker
recalls an occasion when, as a boy, he ‘sallied’ from his home to gather
hazelnuts with ‘A nutting crook in hand’. He remembers ‘forcing’ his way
through the uncultivated countryside, through woods and ‘pathless rocks’,
until he comes to ‘one dear nook / Unvisited’. It is, he recalls, ‘A virgin
scene’ and he stands there awhile, ‘Breathing with such suppression of the
heart / As joy delights in’. This bower is, he thinks, a place where the seasons
pass, year after year, ‘unseen by any human eye’. He sits down in the bower
enjoying the murmuring of a brook, his heart ‘luxuriat[ing] with indifferent
things’ (ll.3–39); but after a while he gets up:
Then up I rose,
And dragg’d to earth both branch and bough, with crash
And merciless ravage, and the shady nook
Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
Deform’d and sullied, patiently gave up
Their quiet being; and unless I now
Confound my present feelings with the past,
Even then, when from the bower I turn’d away,
Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings—Eco 139
I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
The silent trees and the intruding sky.— (ll.41–51)
The poem ends with what might appear to be a rather weak ‘moral’: we should
adopt a ‘gentleness of heart’ in relation to nature, ‘for there is a Spirit in
the woods’ (ll.53–4), the speaker declares. More powerful, alarming and
provocative is the shock of this sudden, unmotivated and violent destruction.
In Western literary and other culture, ‘nature’ is often fundamentally dis-
tinguished from the human and, at the same time, gendered as female and
even as maternal (as in the phrase ‘Mother Nature’). There certainly seem to
be indications of femininity and motherhood in Wordsworth’s description of
the womb-like bower before it is defiled: it is a (feminized) ‘virgin scene’ but it
also features hazels hung with (maternal-sounding) ‘milk-white clusters’
(l.18). The poem has consequently been read from the perspective of psycho-
analysis as an expression of a child’s rage (his rage and love, his rage because of
his love, or need) for his mother, in terms of the desire to destroy what gives
him physical, emotional, spiritual nurture. And it has been read in terms of
sexual violence, as a kind of ‘rape’ of a feminized nature. It should also be said
that, in keeping with the sexual suggestiveness of Wordsworth’s language,
there is also a case for seeing the bowers and the hazels as phallic and virile:
‘not a broken bough / Droop’d with its wither’d leaves.../...but the hazels
rose/ Tall and erect’ (ll.15–18).
But these are not the only ways of reading Wordsworth’s poem. What is
most striking about ‘Nutting’ is the way that the destruction of nature seems
notto be motivated, the way that it is unexplained, seemingly inexplicable.
So that we are left with the question with which we started: what drives us, or
what drives Wordsworth’s speaker, to destroy the world? This, in a sense, is
the core ecological question, perhaps finally the only question (along with the
related question: how do we prevent this destruction?). In recent years, there
has been what amounts to an ‘ecological turn’ in thinking about literature,
a turn that, as we shall argue, has the potential fundamentally to transform the
way that we think about literature and about reading. Critics have begun to
analyse ways in which literature engages with the destruction of nature, and
with the relationship between humanity and the biosphere (of which, of
course, humanity is ambiguously a part – both part of nature and not part of
nature). In focusing on this interaction, ecocritical thinking complicates and
adds to the more conventional idea that literature is concerned with questions
of gender, race, class, economics, history, sexuality, and so on. It is for this
reason that Timothy Clark calls ecocriticism ‘a provocative misfit amidst...
literary and cultural debate’ (Clark, forthcoming). It may be the case that140 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
writers and critics, aswriters and critics, can do little or nothing to prevent
or resolve problems of global warming, over-fishing, widespread pollution,
the destruction on epic scale of animal and plant habitats, mass extinction
of species along with human-engineered ecological disasters in all forms – to
prevent what Martin Amis starkly sums up as the ‘toiletization of the planet’
(quoted in Deitering 1996, 196). Writers and critics are, however, well placed
to analyse the ways in which this wasting of our world is not simply material or
physical, but also rhetorical – the ways in which it is defined, conditioned and
even, in certain respects, controlled by language itself.
Rather than focusing on the question of the subjectivity of the speaker in
Wordsworth’s poem and drawing on Oedipal models of development, an eco-
inflected approach would register the larger contexts with which the speaker
struggles in this poem. An ecocritical reading might notice, for example, the
way in which Wordsworth’s poem seems to be structured around a series of
oppositions: before/after; nature/human; wilderness/cultivation; and most
explicitly, ‘virgin’ nature and its destruction and desecration by the boy. But it
might also reckon with the way in which the destruction of the bower is in fact
prefigured in the description of nature before the attack: in a sense, nature has
already been desecrated, even in its representation as wilderness. Nature is
always already contaminated by the human and by language. Death, after all, is
present in the opening lines: ‘It seems a day’, the poem begins, ‘One of those
heavenly days which cannot die / When forth I sallied from our cottage-door’
(ll.1–3). It seemsthat it cannot die, yet it is already in the past tense (‘I sallied’):
thus there is already an intimation of mortality hanging over the day in ques-
tion. It is indeed as if in Wordsworth’s ‘sallied’, ‘sullied’ might also be heard,
so sallying forth would already be a sullying. And, after all, there is something
slightly nutty about ‘Nutting’. The boy himself seems a little crazed. (Later
in life Wordsworth declared of the poem ‘I was an impassioned nutter’
(Wordsworth 1992, 391).) The speaker describes his younger self as being
‘Trick’d out in proud disguise of Beggar’s weeds’ (l.7), as if his whole bearing
and ‘Motley’ appearance (l.10) is a kind of ‘trick’. It is as if his clothes are
the socially and culturally constituted other of fruitful, productive, desirable
nature, as if they are ‘weeds’; and as if humanity is as a beggar to nature. These
and other traces of deception, violence, cruelty, insanity, jesting, clowning and
impoverishment are strangely at work within Wordsworth’s pastoral opening,
his apparently ‘innocent’ description of a country walk. So that rather than a
strict opposition between a boy’s harmony with nature and his despoliation of
it, the language of the poem (also) presents us with the idea that that relation-
ship is always mediated, compromised, violent. It leads us to reflect, indeed,
on the idea that, as Jacques Derrida puts it, ‘there is no natural violence,Eco 141
an earthquake is not violent, it is only violent insofar as it damages human
interests’ (Derrida and Ferraris 2001, 92). Violence has to do with the human,
starting with the violence of language itself, in its representations and appro-
priations of ‘nature’.
Despite the ‘ism’ in its name, ecocriticism is not in fact constituted as yet
another ‘ism’: it does not offer a distinctive methodology of reading, but
draws on feminist or Marxist or historical or postcolonial or psychoanalytic
or deconstructive approaches, in order to attend to a world of environmental
questions. The term ‘ecocriticism’ is perhaps useful as a means of referring
to a relatively new dimension and emphasis in literary studies and beyond, but
in many respects it makes no sense. It is not a matter of choosing to be or not to
be an ecocritic. We are all eco-critters, so to speak, some less responsible and
thoughtful than others. Ecocritical thinking in this respect involves a change of
scale and vision: rather than an obsession with human-sized objects, it attends
both to the miniature realm of a blade of grass, an ant, amoeba, or pathogen,
and to the mega-scale of the ocean, the mountain, or even the earth itself (as
well as everything in between). An ecocritical reading might foreground those
strange lines towards the end of Wordsworth’s poem about the boy ‘Exulting,
rich beyond the wealth of kings’ while also feeling ‘a sense of pain’ when
he sees what he has done; and it might consider the lines as a reflection on
the way that both public and private wealth are dependent on the exploitation
and ultimately the destruction of nature. From this perspective, the poem
would seem to encapsulate a pattern that the environmental sociologist Franz
Broswimmer analyses in his compelling study of the destructive effects of
human communities throughout history, Ecocide: A Short History of Mass
Extinction of Species(2002), in which successful societies accumulate wealth
through ecological destruction to the point at which their very existence
is undermined as a result of that wasting of the environment, in an eco-
unfriendly cycle of boom-and-bust.
The pattern of destruction that Broswimmer describes has, of course,
accelerated in the 200 years since Wordsworth was writing. While early
societies produced their own localized form of unintended ‘ecocide’ and
their own subsequent demise (Broswimmer examines the cases of temporarily
‘successful’ societies such as the Mesopotamians, the Romans, the Mayans,
and others), twenty-first century global capitalism is currently facing the
possibility that within the lifetime of many of us living today, our rapacious,
land-grabbing, polluting rage for road- and air-travel, consumables and other
material possessions will lead inexorably, unstoppably to the effective destruc-
tion of more or less all life on the planet. Such a future is imagined in Cormac
McCarthy’s Pulitzer-Prize winning novel The Road(2006), a book that has142 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
been hailed by the British journalist and environmental activist George
Monbiot as ‘the most important environmental book ever written’, one that
will ‘change the way you see the world’ (Monbiot 2007). Since for some
people, such praise might make the novel sound like a worthy but dull attack
on global capitalism, we would like to affirm that The Roadis also a compelling
narrative written in brilliant but restrained, almost biblical prose, and that,
despite its bleak attenuations of verbal texture, it presents a richly moving
and highly readable narrative of a post-apocalyptic future. For Monbiot, the
importance of McCarthy’s novel lies in its vivid imagining of the devastating
reality of life for a few survivors after an apocalyptic event which has left the
world dimmed, grey with floating ash, and in which almost all animal and
plant life is dead. Nights in this world are ‘beyond darkness’, while days
are ‘more grey each one than what had gone before’ (1). McCarthy imagines a
desperate, barren end for a world in which language itself is dying out:
The world shrinking down about a raw core of parsible entities. The names
of things slowly following those things into oblivion. Colors. The names of
birds. Things to eat. More fragile than he would have thought. How much
of it was gone already? The sacred idiom shorn of its referents and so of its
reality. Drawing down like something trying to preserve heat. In time to
wink out forever. (93)
There are scattered, mostly murderous human survivors, but the only other
living animal and plant life encountered are a few mushrooms, at one point,
which are quickly eaten, and at another point the distant bark of a dog – which,
if its ominous silencing is anything to go by, also quickly becomes someone’s
dinner. The narrative concerns an unnamed man and his young son who
are travelling south through a devastated America in search of the ocean and
life-saving warmth – and the possibility, the tenuous and almost entirely
unwarranted hope, of some community with which to settle, of some possible
future. The pair walk slowly through a scorched and blackened landscape
almost entirely denuded of life, scavenging for sustenance amongst the detri-
tus left after an apocalyptic event several years earlier (a nuclear war? an impact
with a large asteroid? – the text does not disclose). Since the catastrophe
and the almost complete destruction of animal and plant life, survival has
depended on scavenging for residual products of lost modernity such as
canned food. But such products have become more and more scarce and the
savagery with which the few survivors treat each other has consequently
become more extreme: everyone is now starving and other people are there-
fore seen as rivals for food or even asfood. The most shocking scenes in thisEco 143
often harrowing novel involve cannibalism: the man opens a locked cellar to
see a group of prisoners whose limbs are to be harvested for their captors’
nourishment even while they are still alive; later, the man and the boy come
across a fire, recently abandoned in panic, over which is the blackened, gutted
torso of a baby on a spit. In this new world, order, morality, humanity itself
has almost entirely broken down and remains only in the father’s love for
his son, his determination to protect him, and in the refusal of the man and
the boy to exploit others to save themselves. The importance of McCarthy’s
novel lies in its bleak, almost affectless world of its prose, and its starkly con-
ceived, terrifying vision of a post-apocalyptic future, with its warning against
our current profligate existence.
Wordsworth’s poem and McCarthy’s novel might help us to think about
the kinds of ideas, and the ways of reading, that ecocritical thinking opens up.
The following might be considered as some of the most important terms
whereby literature can be reconceived and literary texts reread:
Externality
‘Externality’ is the idea that there is an environment elsewhere, outside of
our immediate habitat available for exploitation – another village, town or
region, another country or, best of all, another continent or even another
planet. The concept of externality links with questions of colonialism and
postcolonialism in particular since this ‘elsewhere’ is typically a colony whose
natural resources can be exploited for the economic benefit of the colonisers
regardless of the effect on the indigenous population (whether human or not).
It is everything that is at issue in the idea of the exotic. But a properly eco-
logical thinking figures externality as a dangerous myth, bringing us up against
the fact that there is only one world, in which everything is connected to every-
thing else. It has been estimated that for all of the six billion people now alive
to have a standard of living equivalent to that of the average American citizen
there would need to be two or three extra Earth-sized planets. But there are no
such planets, and the idea that we could colonize, say, the atmosphere-thin
wastes of the moon or the arctic desert of Mars seems little more than a
consoling but dangerous fantasy (like ideas of heaven or any other after-life
Nirvana in which the failings of this life are imagined to be magically redeemed
in another, alternative ‘world’): outside of science-fiction or the wilder specu-
lations of scientists, there is effectively no other space, no externality, apart
from the Earth, no other world but this one. Externality in Wordsworth’s
poem is the compromised, sullied wilderness into which the boy sallies. In
McCarthy’s novel, there is a sense in which the external, the other of American144 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
global colonialism, has become internal, a sense that this externality has finally
been destroyed, that there is finally no elsewhere, no place to go that is not
already a devastated, alien, dead, waste land.
Ethics of the future
While ecology is concerned with the suffering of millions of people on the
planet today whose lives are compromised or indeed wasted by environmental
destruction and mismanagement, it is also necessarily future-oriented.
Ecocriticism therefore demands a rethinking of ethics, extending the notion
of our responsibility for others unpredictably into the future, since those
others include people yet to be born, as well as those who will live after our
death. While the consequences of our communal addiction to road use and
to cheap foreign holidays may not seem to involve significant human suffer-
ing, ecological thinking would stress that your cheap flight to a destination
of sunshine and inexpensive booze is directly correlated to the unknown
suffering of future generations. McCarthy’s The Road is concerned with a
man’s commitment to preserving the life of his son, and in this sense with
the father’s sense of responsibility for future generations. At the same time,
this dystopian novel has to do with a thinking of an unbearable future – and the
lackof a future – that we may be preparing for generations to come (or those
generations that might in consequence notcome) thanks to the choices that we
make today.
Nature
Raymond Williams, one of the first modern ecocritical thinkers, famously
refers to ‘nature’ as ‘perhaps the most complex word in the language’
(Williams 1983, 219). Nature has itself come under renewed attention, has
been rethought and redefined, in recent ecocritical writing. One of the key
questions regarding ‘nature’ concerns its relationship with the human. Is
‘nature’ that which is outside of, other to, the human, as is suggested by certain
forms of religion, for example those that deny the naturalism of Darwinian
evolution? Or are humans part ofnature, as is suggested by Darwinism and
more generally by the Western scientific paradigm? While ecocritical thinking
would tend to align itself with the ‘scientific’ paradigm, with the idea of the
human as animal, it also pays attention to ways in which this ambiguity
or uncertainty operates in literary texts and in cultural production more
generally. Wordsworth’s presentation of nature in ‘Nutting’ is, as we have
seen, ambiguous: ‘nature’ is where the boy is not; but for the poet to registerEco 145
nature he must have experienced it, nature must be humanized (and in being
humanized it is contaminated, destroyed). In a sense, there is no such thing
as nature, no such thing as the unmediated, unsullied, non-human nature
that Wordsworth’s poem might seem to suggest. ‘There is no nature’, Alan Liu
has famously remarked in a monumental tome on Wordsworth and history,
‘except as it is constituted by acts of political definition’ (Liu 1989, 104).
Environmental criticism
‘Environmental criticism’ is the term that one of its leading proponents,
Laurence Buell, uses to describe a certain engagement with ‘nature writing’.
Environmental criticism can be distinguished from what has come to be called
ecocriticism in that a critic like Buell is primarily concerned with the kind
of writing that has as its focus the environment and its relationship with
humanity – so-called ‘nature writing’ – while ecocriticism is also concerned
with teasing out the ecological questions, implications and challenges of any
writing, whether or not that writing might involve a conscious and explicit
engagement with nature. For ecocriticism, Jane Austen’s studies of upper-
middle class manners and customs in a novel like Pride and Prejudice(1813)
are as valid a source of ecological speculation and analysis as Henry David
Thoreau’s philosophical musings on his pond in Walden: Or, Life in the
Woods (1854). For the ecocritic, the famous sentence that opens Austen’s
novel (‘It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune must be in want of a wife’) is profoundly ecological: ‘univer-
sally’ raises the question of which ‘universe’ we are speaking of and of whether
in fact this very restrictive Anglo- or at least Euro-centric late eighteenth-
or early-nineteenth century social formation can be exported to other parts
of the world and to other times; a ‘good fortune’ is necessarily premised
on ecological exploitation (whether in the form of private ownership of land,
the privatization of the commons in the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
enclosures movement, the slavery-based economy of Caribbean plantations,
or the newly industrialized exploitation of mineral and other resources); and
the fact that marriage is premised on reproduction, on the propagation of the
species, means that it is necessarily linked to the questions of population and
overpopulation that, in his controversial book An Essay on the Principle of
Population(1798), Thomas Malthus was beginning to bring to the attention
of the English-speaking world at about the time that Austen was writing. An
ecocritical reading of the first sentence of Austen’s novel would be alert to all
of these and other ‘environmental’ factors in her famous novel; it would reread
the novel, indeed, according to the terms dictated by such questions, just as146 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
much as it would focus on the more obviously ‘ecological’ questions raised
by Wordsworth’s poem or McCarthy’s novel.
Deep ecology
Deep ecology is an environmental movement that rejects the notion of ‘sus-
tainable development’ and suggests that capitalism, progress, even Western
liberalism itself is responsible for the current ecological crisis that afflicts the
world. Deep ecology might be compared to the literary and philosophical
work of deconstruction in its call for a radical critique and transformation
of conventional ways of conceiving of ‘human’ values, of humanism, even of
science itself. For deep ecologists, it is a matter of new ways of thinking about
our relationship with the world, a new ethics and politics that will challenge
the instrumentalist view that the world is and should be available for human
exploitation. Both Wordsworth’s poem and McCarthy’s novel allow for the
possibility of a rethinking of the relationship between humans and the bio-
sphere: it would be possible to read Wordsworth’s poem as a radical critique
of the colonizing tendency of humans; McCarthy’s novel is, among other
things, a polemic that calls for a fundamental revaluation of environmental
ethics and of the way we live now.
Ecofeminism
As we have suggested in relation to Wordsworth’s poem, ecofeminism attends
in particular to the figurative language in which women and nature are
presented and it responds to ways in which nature and the feminine are often
linked in a gesture that denigrates both. In a landmark essay from 1984,
for example, Annette Kolodny comments on ‘how bound we still are by the
vocabulary of a feminine landscape and the psychological patterns of regres-
sion and violation that it implies’ (Kolodny 1996, 176). Thus, ecofeminist
critics such as Kolodny, Louise Westling, Patrick Murphy, Greta Gaard,
Donna Haraway and others have highlighted and questioned the gendering of
‘nature’ in literary and other discourse. From this perspective, patriarchy is
itself understood to be responsible for the exploitation of both nature and
women. Such exploitation is produced partly by way of an identification
of one with the other (women are said to be less rational than men, thus ‘closer
to nature’, and therefore in need of civilizing, through masculine control and
order). Non- or anti-patriarchal thinking, according to this analysis, would
allow for a relationship with the ecosystem that is not exploitative and would
demand, indeed, an ethics and politics that is no longer driven by patriarchalEco 147
codes of bourgeois individualism and what Marx calls ‘primitive accumula-
tion’, by colonization, the violent and rapacious drive for mastery, and, neces-
sarily, ecological destruction. Gender, like nature itself, is written into The
Roadjust by the fact that there are virtually no female characters in the novel:
it’s a man’s world, as the chilling saying goes. Nature – in the sense of living
things – has been almost completely destroyed, and there are almost no
women in this new, brutally savage world. But in the novel’s denoucment the
boy finds a family – a substitute father andmother – in a scene which at least
offers the hope of new life, of women and of nature.
Anthropomorphic, anthropocentric
To borrow a distinction that Don Scheese makes, ecocritical thinking is
eco- rather than ego-centred (Scheese 1996, 307). As such, it draws our atten-
tion to the multiple ways in which literary texts figure the non-human as
human – to anthropomorphism – in what is often a sentimental appropriation
of the non-human for human ends. Anthropomorphism includes the casual
use of what John Ruskin calls the ‘affective fallacy’ (Modern Painters(1860)
Part 4, Chapter 12). For example, the lightning that strikes the old oak tree
in Chapter 23 of Jane Eyre somehow articulates the double threat and
temptation that Rochester’s proposal of marriage represents to Jane; the storm
in Chapter 83 of Middlemarch similarly reflects the ‘stormy’ passions of
Dorothea and Will Ladislaw; and so on. The ruses and delusions of anthro-
pomorphism are also at work in the celebration of natural sublimity in a poem
like Percy Bysshe Shelley’s ‘Mont Blanc’ (1816), in which the mountain is
figured as (or as resembling) ‘My own, my human mind’ (l.37), as well as in the
famous presentation of Egdon Heath as one of the main ‘characters’, even
the protagonist, of Thomas Hardy’s The Return of the Native (1878).
Anthropomorphism also concerns the way in which animals are regularly
treated as having human motivations, emotions, language, consciousness,
even morality – from countless examples of fables, children’s literature and
fairy tales to more subtle anthropomorphisms such as the whale in Herman
Melville’s Moby-Dick (1851), bees in some of Sylvia Plath’s Ariel poems
(1965), ants in Derek Walcott’s ‘The Bounty’ (1997), or the crow in Philip
Roth’s The Human Stain (2000) that is presented as part of an attack on
late-twentieth century conceptions of the ‘human’. Ecocritical thinking ana-
lyzes the ways in which such figurations of the apparently non-human lead
inexorably to anthropocentrism, to the configuration of the world in human
terms – which in turn leads to the exploitation of the non-human (however
that category is defined) for human benefit. The world is conceived of as148 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
human-centred and therefore endlessly available as a resource for human
comfort, wealth and well-being. The ecologist Michael Robins offers a
striking suggestion for rethinking anthropocentrism when he comments
on human armpits (yours as well as ours, we fear): ‘From the biosphere’s
perspective, the whole point of Homo sapiens is their armpits, aswarm with
24.1 billion bacteria’ (quoted in Campbell 1996, 133).
So where does this leave us (apart from worrying about our underarms and
deodorants)? As well as praising The Road, George Monbiot has expressed
his enthusiasm for the first Hollywood global-warming disaster movie, The
Day After Tomorrow(2004), declaring it a ‘great movie’ and, despite its ‘lousy
science’, ‘one of the best movies ever released’ (Monbiot 2004). But we think
that Monbiot should get out more (at least to the movies). In our judgment,
The Day After Tomorrowstinks. The science is not just lousy, it’s preposter-
ous, matched only by the blockbuster’s toxic combination of melodrama and
sentimentality (served up in alternating chunks at regular 10-minute inter-
vals), by its frankly cruddy special effects, characterization and dialogue, and
by the absurdity of its plot. We can hardly bring ourselves to sketch the story:
a maverick climatologist, having personally briefed the US President in
Washington on the coming global disaster and advised evacuation of the
population of the southern US states to Mexico – it is too late to save the inhab-
itants of the northern states; the population of Canada doesn’t get a look in –
nevertheless sets out, amidst the mother of all snap ice-ages, to drive and then
walk to New York in order to save his son, who is sheltering in the famous
public library with a handful of other refugees. (All those who foolishly left
the library have perished in the −150°C freeze along with most other New
Yorkers.) The Day After Tomorrow shares with The Road a cataclysmic
scenario and a recuperative father–son narrative, and despite the radical
nature of McCarthy’s dystopian novel, its truly inventive evocation of a post-
apocalyptic world, an ecocritical reading might finally see both novel and
movie as embedded in a troubling anthropocentrism that undermines the
ability of either to fully confront ecological questions. In both, father and son
encapsulate the liberal-humanist idea that individual human life (rather than
populations, rather than the biosphere or ecosystem) is the ultimate and
finally the only value. Both are characterized by the familiar Hollywood eth-
ical calculus (the basis of all‘disaster movies’, indeed) which asserts that the
survival of a single unique individual allows redemptive closure (and a happy
ending) regardless of how many others get wiped out along the way. And both
affirm the values of the so-called ‘nuclear’ family: at the end of McCarthy’s
novel, although the father dies, the boy finds another family with whom heEco 149
might survive and even thrive; the movie ends with the father finding and
rescuing his son, and with the son’s romantic attachment to the attractive
young woman with whom he has shared his life-threatening library experi-
ence. Life goes on, at least for these few people, for these individual families.
So while we share Monbiot’s enthusiasm for narratives that might indeed
shake up people’s indifference to environmental degradation and disaster,
we would stress that ecocritical readings of such texts should be alert to the
complexities both of their environmental contexts and their linguistic and
indissociably linked aesthetic values. To put it simply, the failures of The Day
After Tomorrowas a movie are bound up with its failures of ecological analysis;
and the weaknesses of The Road, such as they are, have to do with a certain
redemptive sentiment that recoils at the full implications of its own radical
vision of an ecologically bereft future. It is increasingly possible, and indeed
urgent and necessary, therefore, to develop forceful and compelling ecocritical
readings across the entire range of literary and other writings, readings that
go beyond the business-as-usual anthropocentrism of conventional liberal
humanism, and that take as their focus the ecosystem itself – that place, that
home (eco- is from Greek oikos, house, dwelling) in which we have no choice
but to live and, like other animals, die.
Further reading
Two essential and reasonably accessible texts to start with are Greg Garrard’s
lucid and intelligent introduction to the field, Ecocriticism (2004), and
Laurence Coupe’s valuable collection of fairly brief extracts from influential
essays from the Romantic period to the present, The Green Studies Reader
(2000). In writing this chapter we have been helped by seeing a draft of
Timothy Clark’s excellent Cambridge Introduction to Literature and the
Environment(forthcoming), which we recommend as a readable and highly
informative primer. Raymond Williams’s The Country and the City(1973) is
an important and influential precursor of ecocriticism, and Jonathan Bate’s’
Romantic Ecology(1991) is another influential early intervention in the field,
mainly focused on Wordsworth (see also Bate’s more recent and wider-
ranging The Song of the Earth(2000)). Much more demanding is Timothy
Morton’s Ecology Without Nature(2007), a sophisticated study which, like
Clark’s book, stresses the importance of engaging ecocriticism with decon-
structive literary and cultural theory. There is some interesting recent work
on ecology and early-modern literature, including Mary Floyd-Wilson and
Garrett A. Sullivan, Jr, Environment and Embodiment in Early Modern
England (2007), Gabriel Egan, Green Shakespeare (2006), and Robert N.150 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Watson, Back to Nature(2006). Three useful collections of essays that also
offer helpful introductions are Glotefelty and Fromm, ed., The Ecocriticism
Reader(1996), Armbruster and Wallace, eds, Beyond Nature Writing(2001),
and Kerridge and Sammells, eds, Writing the Environment (1998). The
journal Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and the Environment(ISLE)
publishes essays on ecocriticism and topics around literary ecology (see
www.unr.edu/cla/engl/isle/) 

17. Animals
Here are four animals:
1.
His small Umbrella quaintly halved
Describing in the Air
An Arc alike inscrutable
Elate Philosopher.
2.
This animal which, like a ship’s anchor,
first casts off in the void,
In order to – even upside down – maintain
itself there suddenly
3.
Spacefarers past living planetfall
on our ever-dive in bloom crystal:
when about our self kin selves appear,
slowing, rubber to pulp, we slack from spear...
4.
Queer, with your thin wings and streaming legs,
How you sail like a heron, or a dull clot of air,
A nothingness.
All of these poems concern animals, whether mammal, insect or fish. Some
of them may be easier to identify than others. The first is a bat, by Emily
Dickinson; the second a spider, by Francis Ponge; the third, cuttlefish, by Les152 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Murray; and last but not least, a mosquito, by D.H. Lawrence. Everything
we hope to explore here, apropos the question of animals and literature, might
be illustrated on the basis of these four brief extracts. We say ‘literature’ but
we need in fact to be wary: all of these examples are poems. Indeed there is,
we want to suggest, something special about the relationship between poetry
and animals, something that takes us, perhaps, to the very heart of what
we mean by terms such as the ‘poetic’, ‘poetic language’ and even ‘poem’. And
this can in turn, we will argue, illuminate in a more general way what we call
literature.
This might sound like a merely aesthetic exercise confined to looking at
how a few poets write about little creatures, furry or otherwise, but our topic is
of course far larger. The world is currently challenged, not only by terrible
poverty, injustice and inequality, and by environmental degradation and cli-
mate change, but also by the widespread and massive destruction of so-called
‘wildlife’ habitats, the rapid disappearance of countless different animal
species and the threat of many more extinctions to come. These challenges
are all interrelated in different and highly complex ways, but at their core is
the violence of what is called anthropocentrism. Anthropocentrism has to
do with how humans think and act as if ‘man’ (in Heidegger’s phrase) were
‘the lord of the earth’, going around ‘everywhere and always encounter[ing]
only himself’ (Heidegger 1977, 27). As we try to argue elsewhere in this book
(in ‘Me’, ‘Laughter’ and ‘Eco’, in particular), the human is not at the centre of
the world, however much we might imagine or behave otherwise. In many
ways, no doubt, the implications and consequences of Darwin’s On the
Origin of Species(1859) and The Descent of Man(1871) are still sinking in. So
too, perhaps, is the gender-biased presumptuousness of referring to human-
ity as ‘man’. The crisis here is obviously not just one of language and naming
– though that, as we shall see, is perhaps more significant than might be
supposed. Nor is it only of concern to those who regard themselves as ‘green’
or ‘feminist’. Like the question of environmentalism that we discuss in ‘Eco’,
the question of animals and animality watches over us all, every moment. The
latter indeed may be still watching, literally, after the end of humanity.
In calling this chapter ‘Animals’ and opening with a few brief examples
of poems about animals, we have perhaps already managed to give the impres-
sion that there are animals (bats, spiders, cuttlefish and mosquitoes) on the
one hand, and humans (poets) on the other. Humans areanimals, after all: an
‘animal’ is fundamentally simply ‘a living creature’ (OED, sense 1a), a word
deriving from the Latin anima, ‘breath’. So what happens when humans write
about other animals? We know that Dickinson’s poem is about a bat because it
opens with the words, ‘The Bat is dun, with wrinkled Wings –’ (Poem 1575).Animals 153
But the four-line stanza we have quoted is in fact extraordinarily difficult to
pin down, on account of its imaginative and syntactic complexity. The verse
in question seems to evoke the bat’s wings and the movement they trace in
the air. The lines appear to constitute a sentence, but there is no main verb. We
are compelled to take the present participle ‘describing’ as the main verb, but
we are still left with the conundrum of ‘alike’ and the strangeness of ‘elate’ as
an adjective (meaning lifted, raised, exalted, inspired). The four-line sentence
notably lacks all punctuation: it is as if the words and phrases themselves were
batting about, this way and that, unpredictable and, indeed, like an animal,
inscrutable. A provoking rapport emerges here between the poem and the
bat. You cannot pin down the lines anymore than you could the creature
described. It is perhaps no coincidence that in a famous essay in which he tries
to pin down consciousness, the philosopher Thomas Nagel should choose to
reflect on the question of what it is like to be a bat (Nagel 1974). Inscrutability
is a feature of these lines of poetry as it is of the line or lines of the ‘Arc’ that ‘the
Bat’ itself describes. For Dickinson’s bat, after all, is himself a sort of poet or
writer: ‘Describing in the Air / An Arc alike inscrutable / Elate Philosopher.’
Dickinson’s poem has a strikingly self-reflexive dimension: it can be read,
among other things, as a poem about the poetic, about writing, and more par-
ticularly about writing (itself) as act or event, doing or making. (We might
helpfully recall here the etymology of ‘poetry’, from the ancient Greek poiein,
to do or make.) The lines from Ponge’s poem ‘The New Spider’ are up to
something similar: the very syntax, slipping and interconnectedness of the
lines seems to cast forth the impression of a spider weaving: ‘In order to – even
upside down – maintain / itself there suddenly’. (Another etymology comes to
mind here: the word ‘text’ derives from the Latin textere, to weave.) Likewise,
Murray’s strangely beautiful, ghostlike poem ‘Cuttlefish’ concludes with an
image of writing in the ink of cuttlefish culture: ‘leaving, of our culture, an ecto-
plasm of ink’. (Murray is here alluding to ‘sepia’, another name for cuttlefish.
The sepia of sepia photography and water-colour paint is indeed, literally, a
product of cuttlefish. The earliest photographs were writings not just in light
but in cuttlefish ink.)
Lawrence’s ‘The Mosquito’ is in some ways the most surreptitious in
its self-reflexivity. It differs from the other poems discussed here in that it
addresses the animal itself. It is characterized by a sort of bantering, question-
ing, conversational tone, opening with the words: ‘When did you start your
tricks, / Monsieur?’ Everyone knows that mosquitoes are not French: the
poem’s opening address is at once comical and indicative of the tricksiness
of Lawrence’s language. Likewise the ‘clot’: ‘dull clot of air’ is marvellously
suggestive of the almost imperceptible, ghostly character of the creature154 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
addressed. At the same time it evokes the image of a blood-clot. ‘Clot’, in other
words, is self-reflexive, a subtle projection on tothis blood-sucking creature of
precisely what, later in the poem, it doesto the speaker. It sucks ‘live blood, /
My blood’, the poet reports. It becomes a ‘winged blood-drop’. Already, from
the beginning, the play in the sounds of ‘monsieur’ and ‘mosquito’ intimates
that this is a poem working explicitly at the level of the signifier, with the
arbitrariness of language. ‘Monsieur’ has no more natural or logical a relation
to the creature in question than does ‘mosquito’ itself. Lawrence’s poem is a
wonderfully funny account of the sort of enraged anthropomorphic telepathy
a mosquito can indeed inspire: ‘I hate the way you lurch off sideways into air /
Having read my thoughts against you’. The poem, it transpires, is about
the poet becoming a mosquito in turn: ‘Am I not mosquito enough to out-
mosquito you?’ And it concludes, perhaps not entirely surprisingly, with the
death of the addressee, the mosquito squished: ‘Queer, what a dim dark
smudge you have disappeared into!’
In a sense, then, each poem is not only aboutan animal, but also aspires to
be a sort of animal. Each would bean ‘animal poem’. In a certain imaginative
register (as if), the poem inscribes itself in the world of the creature described.
It wouldbe a true ‘animal poem’: it would like to be, but of course it cannot. It
would like to be telepathic, it would like not only to communicate with but
to speak on behalf of the animal, as an animal, from the animal’s point of view.
But this would be a kind of anthropomorphism, in other words a fantasy or
projection. In truth, what all of the poems sharply convey is a sense of the
impossibilityof finding the right words, of adequately describing, of putting in
language what a specific animal is like, what is entailed in an encounter with
this particular creature (bat, spider, cuttlefish, mosquito). For how on earth do
you, should you describe a non-human animal? How can you say what it is like
to be one? The English language is stuffed (as a taxidermist might say) with
figurative references to animals. Just spinning off a few examples can make us
sound faintly poetic: quiet as a mouse, sweating like a pig, slow as a tortoise,
a bear hug, a dog’s breakfast, sick as a parrot, crow’s feet, pigeon-toed, the
elephant in the room, rabbit in headlights, dead as a dodo, going the whole
hog, can of worms, dark horse, lion’s share, crocodile tears, snake in the grass,
wolf in sheep’s clothing, sly as a fox, happy as a clam, bullish, lousy, waspish,
hare-brained, headless chicken, water off a duck’s back, eyes like a hawk, frog
in your throat, you can lead a horse to water, whale of a time, loan sharks, lying
toad, swansong, running around like a blue-arsed fly, being badgered, beaver-
ing away, bee in your bonnet, cat got your tongue, completely batty...The
list is as long as the queue for Noah’s ark. We are forever comparing ourselves
to other animals. These idioms seem to affirm the implicit violence of ourAnimals 155
relations with other animals: many of the examples just given involve a
negative figuration of the animal and all seem to involve a kind of easy anthro-
pomorphism. But in the very gesture of such appropriation these idioms also
register the othernessof these creatures.
It is striking, for example, that when Lawrence is trying to describe a
mosquito, he resorts to a simile involving another animal(‘like a heron’), then
to a kind of oxymoron (‘clot of air’), and finally to a blank absence of all image
or resemblance (‘A nothingness’). Correspondingly, Ponge turns to a nautical
metaphor to evoke the spider as it casts off ‘like a ship’s anchor’ into the air.
In the case of the lines from Dickinson and Murray, the explicit marker of
figurative language, the ‘like’ (or ‘as’), is tacit or omitted: the bat’s wings are
(like) a ‘small Umbrella quaintly halved’, the bat is (like) a ‘philosopher’; the
cuttlefish are (like) ‘spacefarers’, their bodies are (like) ‘rubber’, ‘pulp’ and
‘spear’. The elision of such markers, however, merely accentuates the extra-
vagance or fancifulness of the descriptions. Dickinson’s language is anthropo-
morphic, but in a quirky, defamiliarizing way. The figuration of the bat as a sort
of neat and pleasant gentleman (‘His small Umbrella quaintly halved’) entails
unsettling undersides. Murray’s poem on the other hand crucially depends on
its title. Without the word ‘Cuttlefish’ at the top of the page we could hardly be
expected to surmise who or what is the subject of the fantastical, science-
fictional phrases: ‘Spacefarers past living planetfall / on our ever-dive in bloom
crystal’. (‘Planetfall’, as the OED informs us, is originally a mid-twentieth-
century word for ‘A landing on a planet after a journey through space’.) We are
so immersed in a language of strange compounds and juxtapositions (‘ever-
dive’, ‘bloom crystal’), in a fluid syntax that seems to let odd phrases float by
(‘past living’, ‘in bloom’) while unsettling any easy identification of parts of
speech (is ‘bloom’ an adjective, ‘pulp’ a verb, ‘spear’ a noun?), that we may not
even notice on first reading that these are rhyming couplets. These opening
lines are rendered even more bizarre, perhaps, by the poet’s anthropomorphic
strategy of speaking in a cuttlefish royal we (‘our ever-dive’, ‘our self’, ‘we
slack’). Perplexed (but also delighted) we may well find ourselves asking: ‘we’?
what is this? what is this poem or poet like? The most powerful poems about
animals are those that disorient us, leave the reader stranded, up in the air,
underground or underwater, breathtaken. Murray’s ‘Cuttlefish’ appears in
a volume that is suggestively entitled Translations from the Natural World:
all animal poems are ‘translations’, we might say, but without access to an
original. In a sense they are all works of science fiction or strangely ‘elate’
philosophy.
There is a growing body of critical and theoretical work (sometimes
referred to as ‘animal studies’) concerned with ‘the question of the animal’ as156 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the basis for what Matthew Calarco, in his book Zoographies, has called ‘new
social movements that are seeking to develop a postliberal, posthumanist
approach to politics’ (Calarco 2008, 6). Debate concerning ‘the question of
the animal’ is, so to speak, a real hornet’s nest. Do animals have rights, as Peter
Singer (1990) and Tom Regan (1983), among others, have argued? Don’t
lots of species of animal exhibit characteristics that are often said to define
the human, such as use of tools, language, altruism, play, inventiveness, suf-
fering, mourning and so on? Is it true, as Aristotle suggested, that ‘no animal
laughs save Man’ (Aristotle 2001, 69)? Is it the case that animals don’t
die but merely ‘perish’, as Heidegger suggested (see Heidegger 1962, 291;
Heidegger 2001, 176)? Or, conversely, should we not suppose that, as Gilles
Deleuze puts it, ‘contrary to the spiritualist prejudice, it is the animal
who knows how to die, who has a sense or premonition of death’ (Deleuze
1998, 2)? Should we feel OK about eating other animals? Can battery-farming
be justified? What about some of the other barbaric ways in which non-
human animals are treated and killed? What gives us the right to make these
decisions? Calarco himself is one of many who argue emphatically that ‘the
human-animal distinction can no longer and ought no longer to be maintained’
(3). There are, however, good reasons for being cautious about such an asser-
tion. A woman is not a spider (despite her appearance in Marvel Comics),
any more than a man is a bat (despite numerous impersonations, from Bram
Stoker to Christian Bale’s ‘dark knight’). Questioning and indeed seeking to
dismantle or deconstruct anthropocentrism, in philosophy as in everyday
life, is one thing; but dropping or claiming to drop distinctions altogether is
something else.
Rather than blurring the line between ‘animal’ and ‘human’ we should
attend to differences. In his remarkable work The Animal That Therefore I
Am, Jacques Derrida explores the idea that, perhaps more effectively than any-
thing else in the world, the ‘question of the animal’ prompts us to think about
‘the wholly other’ (Derrida 2008, 11). In a startling moment the eminent
French philosopher recalls being naked in the bathroom with his cat. (We say
‘his cat’ in order to simplify matters. In fact, like every cat-lover, Derrida
knows that no one can truly own a cat because, as he says, ‘A pussycat never
belongs’ [7].) He is talking about that ‘strange moment’ when, ‘before even
wanting it or knowing it myself, I am passively presented to it as naked,
I am seen and seen naked, before even seeing myselfseen by a cat’, seen by
that ‘wholly other they call “animal”, for example “cat”’ (11). Entirely at odds
with any sentimental or anthropomorphic appropriation of the cat, Derrida,
naked before it, summarizes: ‘Thinking perhaps begins there’ (29). In this way
Derrida seeks to elaborate on the notion that every living creature constitutes
what he calls an ‘unsubstitutable singularity’ (9). It is a question of thiscat, inAnimals 157
Derrida’s bathroom, not just any old cat. Indeed, in his terms, there is no such
thing as ‘any old cat’. Every cat is other, and every other is wholly other. This
sense of the unsubstitutable singularity of any and every animal, he contends,
is especially evident in poetry. And this is one of the ways of distinguishing
poetry from philosophy. As Derrida puts it: ‘thinking concerning the animal,
if there is such a thing, derives from poetry....[This] is what philosophy has,
essentially, had to deprive itself of’ (7).
Walt Whitman writes, in ‘Song of Myself’: ‘I think I could turn and live
with animals, they are so placid and self-contain’d, / I stand and look at them
long and long’ (‘Song of Myself’, section 32). But these lines tell only half the
story: it is also and perhaps more significantly a question about what happens
when the animal looks back, or just looks, at us, in plain day or (imperceptibly
perhaps) at night. Poetry, we have suggested, is especially in sympathy with
the otherness of animals and with the notion of unsubstitutable singularity.
As Ted Hughes puts it, in the context of a discussion of the experience of
composing a poem: ‘the poem is a new species of creature, a new specimen of
the life outside your own’ (Hughes 1967, 17). Every poem would be a differ-
ent creature, looking at its author and each of its readers in a unique way,
bespeaking a being unlike any other poem or any other kind of text. This is
perhaps what poetic originality or genius entails (no pun intended).
The association that Derrida makes between poetry and animals might
lead us to the supposition that the more poetic a novel, short story or play is,
the more likely we are to find animals pervading and haunting it. We could
consider, for example, Shakespeare (for whose animals a supplementary
volume of the Introduction to Literature, Criticism and Theory would be
required), Herman Melville (author of that whale of a book, Moby-Dick),
Franz Kafka or Elizabeth Bowen. Let us just briefly recall one or two instances
from the last two of these writers. One of Kafka’s greatest short fictions, ‘The
Burrow’ (written in 1923), begins with the following immortal sentence: ‘I
have completed the construction of my burrow and it seems to be successful’
(Kafka 1992, 325). The narrator is, apparently, a burrowing animal: thinking,
to recall Derrida’s formulation, perhaps begins there. We never discover quite
what size or indeed what species this burrowing creature is, but we are drawn
nonetheless into the fascination and strangeness of a kind of poetic, imper-
ceptible place. As Deleuze and Guattari nicely observe in Kafka: Toward a
Minor Literature(1986): ‘Kafka is fascinated by everything that is small. If he
doesn’t seem to like children that is because they are caught in an irreversible
becoming-big; the animal kingdom, in contrast, involves smallness and imper-
ceptibility’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1986, 37). Elizabeth Bowen, on the other
hand, does not so much write from the point of view of animals, as let animals
roam, flap around, animate and haunt her writing. Just two of very many158 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
instances from her novel Friends and Relations (1931) may suffice. A car
departs from a country railway station with avian effects: ‘Then his Aunt Janet
drove off rapidly; water went up in wings from some deep puddles’ (65). And,
a little later, a hot summer day in a local market town is evoked through a sort
of soundless feline music: ‘A cat’s yawn gave the note of the afternoon.
Pavements sleepily glared; over the butcher’s a piano played in its sleep’ (80).
(That last example leaves us not only with the subtle enchantment of a cat’s
yawn, but also the easily missed rawness of ‘the butcher’s’.)
Despite the pervasive or recurrent presence of animals in such works, it
is as if, to borrow a formulation from Akira Mizuta Lippit, they ‘exist in a
state of perpetual vanishing’ (Lippit 2000, 1). They haunt these texts. It’s like
the White Rabbit, or the Cheshire Cat, or so many other animals in Lewis
Carroll’s Alicebooks. It’s like the Ghost in Hamlet, momentarily evoked as a
mole under the earth, or beneath the stage. ‘Well said, old mole!’ exclaims
Hamlet, but it has already shifted away: as he goes on to ask, ‘Canst work i’ th’
earth so fast?’ (1.5.170). Focusing attention on the appearances and disap-
pearances of such animals (metaphorical or literal, fabulous or recognizable)
can perhaps enable us to think differently not only about poetry but also about
the ‘poetic’ in literature more generally.
We conclude with another creature that has made ghostly appearances in
literature across the ages, from Homer’s Iliadto Shakespeare’s Richard III(I,
ii, 100) to Beckett’s Company, namely the hedgehog. Perhaps the best-known
correlation between the hedgehog and a work of art is the one made by the
German philosopher and poet Friedrich von Schlegel, who wrote, in 1798,
regarding the literary or philosophical fragment: ‘Like a little work of art, a
fragment must be totally detached from the surrounding world and closed on
itself like a hedgehog’ (quoted in Derrida 1995b, 302). In a wonderful little
text called ‘Che cos’è la poesia?’ (in English, ‘What is poetry?’ or ‘What is the
thing called poetry?’), Derrida obliquely explores this and other figures, trans-
forming these into a new way of thinking about the poetic in relation to the
‘humble’ hedgehog (see Derrida 1995b, 288–99, 301–3). Derrida’s hedge-
hog is a figure for what it is that makes us love language, what makes us want to
remember a poem or a phrase or even a feeling or experience, what makes us
want to ‘learn by heart’. A poem, he proposes, is ‘that very thing that teaches
the heart’ and even ‘invents the heart’ (Derrida 1995b, 295). It’s a kind of
ghostly hedgehog that has nothing to do with ‘literary poetry’ (297), with self-
enclosed fragments or sonnets or epic poems. The hedgehog cannot be owned.
It is a creature that attests to otherness, and above all perhaps to mortality and
to the otherness of death that affects human and non-human animals alike. It is
difficult to say whether Derrida’s little text is a work of philosophy or literaryAnimals 159
theory or poetry. Correspondingly, the poetic nature of this hedgehog cannot,
he suggests, be confined to any genre, poetic, literary or otherwise.
Further reading
In accord with the logic of what we have argued in this chapter, perhaps the
best place to pursue further reading is in the work of poets rather than critics
or theorists: D.H. Lawrence, William Blake, Shakespeare, Elizabeth Bishop,
Ted Hughes, Les Murray, Francis Ponge and so many others. And Kafka’s
stories tell us as much about animals and literature, animals in literature,
or animal literature, as any critical or theoretical writings. Literary works such
as those we have been discussing in this chapter point towards a sense of the
text as (in Hélène Cixous’s phrase) a ‘poetic-animal machine’ (Cixous 1998)
and towards a thinking in terms of what Deleuze and Guattari have called
‘becoming animal’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1986). Among the burgeoning
growth of critical and theoretical material, there are in addition several espe-
cially stimulating books. For a short introductory account, Greg Garrard has a
useful chapter on ‘Animals’ in his book Ecocriticism (2004). Of a more
demanding nature, Zoontologies: The Question of the Animal(2003), ed. Cary
Wolfe, is an excellent collection of poststructuralist, posthumanist inter-
disciplinary essays. So, too, is Knowing Animals, ed. Lawrence Simmons and
Philip Armstrong (2007). Cary Wolfe has also written a fine study with a more
specifically American focus, Animal Rites: American Culture, the Discourse of
Species, and Posthumanism(2003), while Philip Armstrong’s What Animals
Mean in the Fiction of Modernity(2008) looks at literary works from Daniel
Defoe and Jonathan Swift to Will Self and J.M. Coetzee. For a very helpful
study focusing on the early modern period, see Erica Fudge’s Perceiving
Animals: Humans and Beasts in Early Modern English Culture(2002). For
work in a more predominantly philosophical vein, see Animal Others: On
Ethics, Ontology, and Animal Life(1999), ed. Peter H. Steeves, and Matthew
Calarco’s Zoographies: The Question of the Animal from Heidegger to Derrida
(2008). Akira Mazuta Lippit’s Electric Animal: Toward a Rhetoric of Wildlife
(2000) is a compelling but challenging work that brilliantly explores the ‘ques-
tion of the animal’ across philosophy, science and psychoanalysis, as well as
literature and cinema. Derrida’s The Animal That Therefore I Am(2008) is an
extremely rich and complex set of essays that forms a crucial point of reference
in many of the aforementioned secondary works. For two collections of essays
especially concerned with the elaboration of Derrida’s work in this area, see
Derridanimals, a special issue of the Oxford Literary Review(2007), ed. Neil
Badmington, and Demenageries(2009), ed. Anne Berger and Marta Segarra.

18. Ghosts
What has literature to do with ghosts? The word ‘ghost’ is related to
and originates in the German Geist, a word that Chambers Dictionary
defines as ‘spirit, any inspiring or dominating principle’. The OEDgives, as
its first and fourth definitions of ‘ghost’, the ‘soul or spirit, as the principle of
life’ and ‘A person’. In these respects, the ghost is fundamental to our thinking
about the human: to be human is to have a spirit, a soul, a Geist or ghost.
But the more common modern sense of ‘ghost’ (albeit only listed seventh in
the OED) involves the idea of a spectre, an apparition of the dead, a revenant,
the dead returned to a kind of spectral existence – an entity not alive but also
not quite, not finally, dead. Ghosts disturb our sense of the separation of the
living from the dead – which is why they can be so frightening, so uncanny.
These conflicting senses of the word ‘ghost’ suggest that ghosts are both
exterior and central to our sense of the human. Ghosts are paradoxical since
they are both fundamental to the human, fundamentally human, and a denial
or disturbance of the human, the very being of the inhuman. We propose to
devote this chapter, to dedicate it, to the living-dead, to the ghost(s) of litera-
ture. And we propose that this scandal of the ghost, its paradoxy, is embedded
in the very thing that we call literature, inscribed in multiple and haunting
ways, in novels, poems and plays.
Ghosts have a history. They are not what they used to be. Ghosts, in a
sense, arehistory. They do not, after all, come from nowhere, even if they may
appear to do just that. They are always inscribed in a context: they at once
belong to and haunt the idea of a place (hence ‘spirit of place’ or genius loci),
and belong to and haunt the idea of a time (what we could call a ‘spirit of time’
or rather differently what is called the ‘spirit of the age’ or Zeitgeist). In other
words, it is possible to trace a history of ghosts, as well as to think about historyGhosts 161
itself as ghostly, as what can in some form or other always come back. We
might, for example, pursue a history of ghosts in terms of what J. Hillis Miller
calls ‘the disappearance of God’ (Miller 1963) in the nineteenth century. If
the Christian God is, as Karl Marx claimed, ‘Spectre No. 1’ (Marx 1976, 157),
it is fair to suppose that this ‘disappearance’ has altered the conception of
ghosts, holy or otherwise. Correspondingly, we might pursue a history of
ghosts in terms of the nineteenth-century emergence of psychology and, in
particular, psychoanalysis. Ghosts, that is to say, move into one’s head. In
the course of the nineteenth century the ghost is internalized: it becomes a
psychological symptom, and no longer an entity issuing commandments
on a mountain-top or a thing that goes bump in the night.
In particular, psychoanalytic accounts of ghosts have revolutionized liter-
ary studies. We might illustrate this in terms of what is arguably the greatest
‘ghost work’ in English literature, Shakespeare’s Hamlet (1600–01). The
play itself is cryptic and elusive about the apparition and truthfulness of the
figure of the ghost of Hamlet’s father: why is it, for instance, that when
the ghost appears in Act III, scene iv, it is only seen by Hamlet and not by his
mother? But it is also clear that the play’s representation of the ghost is
grounded in the Christian mythology of Shakespeare’s time – hence Hamlet’s
fear that ‘The spirit that I have seen / May be a devil’ who ‘Abuses me to damn
me’ (II, ii, 598–9, 603). In twentieth-century psychoanalytic readings such as
those advanced by Jacques Lacan or Nicolas Abraham, however, the ghost has
become something very different. Lacan develops the ghostly or phantasmatic
dimensions of the basic Freudian reading of the play as Oedipal drama:
Hamlet cannot take revenge on his murderous uncle Claudius because he is
haunted by the sense that what Claudius has done is what he would have
wanted to do – kill his father and go to bed with his mother. In Lacan’s scan-
dalous and brilliant development of this reading of Hamlet(in a seminar in
1959), the ghost has to do with the phallus. As ‘an imaginary object which the
child comes to accept as being in the father’s possession’ (Wright 1992, 318),
the phallus is in a sense the very symbol of paternity. For Lacan, the reason for
Hamlet’s inability to kill Claudius (until, at least, the moment of ‘complete
sacrifice’, i.e. of his own death) is that ‘one cannot strike the phallus, because
the phallus, even the real phallus, is a ghost’ (Lacan 1977b, 50–1). In this way,
Lacan makes Hamlet an allegory of phallocentric culture: phallocentrism
(everything in a culture that serves to equate the symbolic power of the father,
the phallus, with authority, the proper, presence, truth itself) becomes a sort
of farcical but terrible ghost story. In Lacan’s reading, Hamlet’s being haunted
by his father is an allegory of the nature of the ego. In an appalling pun, he
calls Hamlet an ‘hommelette’, a little man, a son, who is both dependent on162 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
his namesake King Hamlet and has his ‘ego’ scrambled – like an egg – by
this haunting. As Maud Ellmann neatly summarizes it: ‘the ego is a ghost’
(Ellmann 1994, 17). There are problems with what Lacan does with a literary
work like Hamlet, in particular in seeming to appropriate it simply as an alle-
gorical means of presenting the ‘truth’ of psychoanalysis. But his thinking has
proved extremely productive and stimulating for critics and theorists con-
cerned to analyse the ghostliness of identity in literary texts and to question
the nature and terms of the phallocentric ghost story in which we continue to
have our being.
In the work of Nicolas Abraham, on the other hand, Hamletis a central
text for his theory that ghosts have to do with unspeakable secrets. The only
reason why people think they see ghosts is because the dead take secrets with
them when they die. In his essay ‘Notes on the Phantom: A Complement to
Freud’s Metapsychology’ (1975), Abraham observes that ‘the theme of the
dead – who, having suffered repression by their family or society, cannot enjoy,
even in death, a state of authenticity – appears to be omnipresent (whether
overtly expressed or disguised) on the fringes of religions and, failing that, in
rational systems’ (Abraham 1994, 171). Ghosts are everywhere, a painful fact
of life. Abraham contends that ‘the “phantom” [or “ghost”], whatever its
form, is nothing but an invention of the living’. People see ghosts because
‘the dead were shamed during their lifetime or...took unspeakable secrets
to the grave’. These secrets remain, like a crypt, a gap, in the unconscious
of the living. The ghost or phantom thus embodies ‘the gap produced in us
by the concealment of some part of a loved object’s life...what haunts are
not the dead, but the gaps left within us by the secrets of others’ (171).
Abraham’s account is helpful in illuminating the strangeness of
Shakespeare’s Hamlet, its obscure but persisting sense of secrets taken to
the grave, of what the ghost calls the untellable ‘secrets of my prison-house’
(I, v, 14). But his ‘Notes on the Phantom’ also opens up new ways of thinking
about ghosts in literature more generally: in effect, it inaugurates a theory
of literature as a theory of ghosts. We can think of this ghostliness, first, in the
relatively straightforward sense described by a character called Stella Rodney
in Elizabeth Bowen’s The Heat of the Day (1948): ‘“What’s unfinished
haunts one; what’s unhealed haunts one”’ (322). From the great fourteenth-
century Middle English dream-elegy Pearl to Don DeLillo’s very different
dream-elegy The Body Artist(2001), literature is a place of ghosts, of what’s
unfinished, unhealed and even untellable. But more precisely, and perhaps
more eerily, Abraham’s work alerts us to a ghostliness about which characters,
and even authors themselves, are unaware. Here we encounter the strangeness
of the ghostly secret as, in Esther Rashkin’s words, ‘a situation or drama thatGhosts 163
is transmitted without being stated and without the sender’s or receiver’s
awareness of its transmission’ (Rashkin 1992, 4).
If psychoanalysis has been important in providing new ways of thinking
about ghosts, however, this has not happened in a vacuum. As we suggested
earlier, it is in fact part of a more general shift in how ghosts have been figured,
theorized and experienced since the end of the nineteenth century. The
emergence of psychology and psychoanalysis has its ghostly counterpart
in literature, especially in the emergence of psychological realism and the
psychological novel. Nowhere is this clearer than in the fiction of Henry
James (1843–1916). In an essay on his ghost stories, published in 1921,
Virginia Woolf writes:
Henry James’s ghosts have nothing in common with the violent old
ghosts – the blood-stained sea captains, the white horses, the headless
ladies of dark lanes and windy commons. They have their origin within
us. They are present whenever the significant overflows our powers of
expressing it; whenever the ordinary appears ringed by the strange. (Woolf
1988, 324)
Stories such as The Turn of the Screw(1898), ‘The Beast in the Jungle’ (1903)
and ‘The Jolly Corner’ (1908) conjure and explore the ghostliness of experi-
ence in profoundly unsettling ways. All of these stories bear witness to the
ungovernable, overflowing strangeness which Woolf evokes. More particu-
larly, they also illustrate the sense of ghostly secrets, of what Abraham called
the ‘gaps left within us by the secrets of others’, together with a sense of the
ghostliness of the ego (or ‘I’) itself.
The last of these stories, ‘The Jolly Corner’, is especially forceful in its evo-
cation of the idea of the ‘I’ as ghost. As in a number of other ghost stories – for
example, Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights(1848), Nathaniel Hawthorne’s
The House of the Seven Gables(1851) and George Douglas Brown’s The House
with the Green Shutters(1901) – ‘The Jolly Corner’ is both the name of a house
and the name of the text itself. The literary work is a haunted house. ‘The Jolly
Corner’ recounts how a 56-year-old, wealthy New Yorker called Spencer
Brydon, long settled in Europe, makes a ‘strangely belated return to America’
(190), having been absent for 33 years. He goes back to his childhood home,
‘his house on the jolly corner, as he usually, and quite fondly, described
it’ (191). Rented out and a source of income for decades, the house is now,
ostensibly, empty. Brydon becomes obsessed with the place, with visiting
and wandering around it, increasingly caught up by the sense that it contains
some ghostly secret of the past. Following a dense but queerly captivating164 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
third-person so-called omniscient narration, we are drawn into a hunt, in
which the protagonist turns out to be both hunter and hunted, haunter and
haunted. As the narrator asks, with the bizarre tone of detachment charac-
teristic of the text as a whole: ‘People enough, first and last, had been in terror
of apparitions, but who had ever before become himself, in the apparitional
world, an incalculable terror?’ (202). Of course – and this is where fiction
is itself most manifestly a haunt – this ‘apparitional world’ to which James
refers only appears through writing. The very strangeness of fiction may
be said to consist in this idea of a ‘medium’, a text, in which the apparitional
and non-apparitional are made of the same stuff, indistinguishable. As E.M.
Forster put it, in Aspects of the Novel(1927): ‘Once in the realm of the fictitious,
what difference is there between an apparition and a mortgage?’ (Forster
1976, 103).
Despite appearances, then, we don’t want to limit our talk about ghost
stories just to ghost stories. Indeed, we would like to suggest that the greater
the literary work, the more ghostly it is. This might be one way of understand-
ing what Derrida is getting at when he proclaims, in his book Spectres of Marx,
that ‘A masterpiece always moves, by definition, in the manner of a ghost’
(Derrida 1994, 18). Playing on the earlier Latin sense of ‘genius’ as ‘spirit’, he
says that a masterpiece is ‘a work of genius, a thingof the spiritwhich precisely
seems to engineer itself[s’ingénier]’ (18). Masterpieces, such as Beowulfor
Hamlet (which is the example Derrida is discussing) or James’s ‘The Jolly
Corner’ or Beckett’s Molloy, are worksthat give a sense of having been spirited
up, of working by themselves. Great works call to be read and reread while
never ceasing to be strange, to resist reading, interpretation and translation.
This is one basis for thinking about canonicity in Harold Bloom’s terms:
the canon is always a spectral affair. As he declares, in The Western Canon:
‘One ancient test for the canonical remains fiercely valid: unless it demands
rereading, the work does not qualify’ (Bloom 1994, 30). A great work will
always seem uncanny, at once strange and familiar; a surprising, unique addi-
tion to the canon and yet somehow foreseen, programmed by the canon; at
once readable and defiant, elusive, baffling. For Bloom, writing itself is essen-
tially about a relationship (always one of anxiety, according to him) with the
dead, with earlier great writers. The point is most succinctly made by Bloom’s
precursor, T.S. Eliot, when he says in his essay ‘Tradition and the Individual
Talent’ (1919) that the ‘best’, ‘most individual’ parts of a literary work are
‘those in which the dead poets...assert their immortality most vigorously’
(Eliot 1975b, 38). It is a relationship eerily evoked in Eliot’s ‘Little Gidding’
(1943), where the speaker describes an encounter in which he ‘caught the
sudden look of some dead master /...The eyes of a familiar compound ghostGhosts 165
/ Both intimate and unidentifiable’ (Eliot 1975a, 193). For Bloom, as for Eliot,
poetry is also a ghostly discourse in a more general sense. This is hauntingly
exemplified by Wallace Stevens’s ‘Large Red Man Reading’ (1948), in which
the subject of the poem, the reader himself, evokes ghosts: ‘There were ghosts
that returned to earth to hear his phrases, / As he sat there reading, aloud, the
great blue tabulae. / They were those from the wilderness of stars that had
expected more’ (423). We are all haunted: experience itself is never enough;
and it is the ghostly discourse of literature which most sharply testifies to this.
One problem with talking about the canon in the way Bloom does is that it
appears to be ahistorical: in other words, literature seems to belong to a time-
less realm, the canon seems to be impervious to the material effects of social,
political, economic and cultural history. Our argument in the present chapter,
however, is that while literature is indeed ‘ghost work’, its haunt is historical.
The ghosts of the twentieth century are not the same as those of the nine-
teenth, and so on. We might, for example, reflect on the links between ghosts
and technology. In the context of Western culture in the third millennium, and
from the point of view of so-called common sense, we may like to believe that
we do not believe in ghosts any more; but in important respects the world has
become and is continuing to become increasingly ghostly. As Jacques Derrida
has observed:
Contrary to what we might believe, the experience of ghosts is not tied to
a bygone historical period, like the landscape of Scottish manors, etc.,
but...is accentuated, accelerated by modern technologies like film, tele-
vision, the telephone. These technologies inhabit, as it were, a phantom
structure...When the very first perception of an image is linked to a
structure of reproduction, then we are dealing with the realm of phantoms.
(Derrida 1989, 61)
This recalls, or calls up, the image of Derrida in Ken McMullen’s film Ghost
Dance(1989) being asked if he believes in ghosts and replying: ‘That’s a hard
question because, you see, I am a ghost.’ In a film, everyone is a ghost. If the
ghost is the revenant, that which uncannily returns without ever being prop-
erly present in the first place, it becomes clear that, more than ever, we live in
the midst of ghosts: the voice on the telephone is only ever the reproduction of
a voice, the image on television or movie-screen only ever a reproduction.
Freud conveys his amazement at the surreal nature of telephones when he
remarks in Civilization and Its Discontents(1930) that ‘With the help of the
telephone [one] can hear at distances which would be [regarded] as unattain-
able even in a fairytale’ (1985e, 279). But since Freud’s day, we have witnessed
the new ghostly arrivals of the space age, the answer phone, video recorder,166 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
camcorder, personal computer, email, the Internet and World Wide Web,
virtual reality, genetic engineering, nanotechnology, the mobile or cell phone
and so forth.
Whether in literature, psychoanalysis or philosophy, contemporary thought
is irrevocably hooked up to developments in technology and telecommunica-
tions. Contemporary literature faces new kinds of challenge in terms of how
to represent, assimilate or think the increasing ghostliness of culture. The
question of literature today is inseparable from an increasingly prevalent,
indeed unavoidable encounter with a technics of the ghost. DeLillo’s The
Body Artist, for example, with its haunting evocations of ghost-voices and
ghost-images in telephones, answering machines, voice-recorders, webcams
and video projections, suggests that calling up ghosts in the twenty-first
century is inseparable from such new technologies.
We would like to conclude by trying to explore some of these ideas in rela-
tion to Toni Morrison’s novel Beloved. This novel, first published in 1987, is
set in America, in the years leading up to and following the abolition of slavery.
It is about the unspeakable reality of slavery, about ghosts and the way in which
US culture continues to be haunted by the atrocities of its past. The narrative
of the novel rests on the dynamic of ghostly secrets and the untellable.
‘Beloved’ is a baby murdered by her mother, Sethe, because the mother sees
death for her daughter as preferable to slavery; ‘Beloved’ is also a beautiful
‘shining’ ghost of a woman who, years later, haunts the lives of Sethe and her
other daughter, Denver, and Sethe’s drifting partner Paul D. The novel, in its
very title, is a ghost, or gathering of ghosts. Belovedis about
what it took to drag the teeth of that saw under the little chin; to feel the baby
blood pump like oil in [Sethe’s] hands; to hold her face so her head would
stay on; to squeeze her so she could absorb, still, the death spasms that shot
through that adored body, plump and sweet with life. (251)
This, 250 pages into the text, is the most ‘graphic’ description we are given of
what nevertheless haunts the book from the title onwards. The haunting is
inscribed in the passage just quoted, for example, in the eerie double sense
of ‘still’ (as adverb ‘yet’ and verb ‘stop’): this gross moment is a still, stilled
moment, caught in time, which still haunts, is still to be absorbed. On the final
page of the novel we encounter the statement that ‘This is not a story to pass
on’ (275). This statement suggests that the story should not or cannot be told,
but also that it is not one we can pass by. The history of the United States is an
untellable ghost story that must not, however, be forgotten. Every house in the
USA is a haunted house. As Baby Suggs says in grimly comic response to herGhosts 167
daughter-in-law Sethe’s suggestion that they vacate the baby-haunted house
known only by its number (124): ‘“Not a house in the country ain’t packed
to its rafters with some dead Negro’s grief. We lucky this ghost is a baby. My
husband’s spirit was to come back in here? or yours? Don’t talk to me”’ (5).
Belovedis set in the nineteenth century and is faithful to the modes of ghost-
liness, spirits, tele-culture and telecommunications available at that time: the
text opens with an attempted exorcism and an instance of apparent telekinesis
(‘The sideboard took a step forward but nothing else did’: 4); there are allu-
sions to telegraphy and the recently invented Morse code (110), to ‘long-
distance love’ (95) and even to photography (275). But in other ways Beloved
is a profoundly contemporary novel, a work of the late twentieth century not
only in style and form but also in terms of its conception and implacable
analysis of ghosts. In particular, it is written out of or through a psycho-
analytically inflected understanding of deferred meaning, a sense of trauma as
ghostly, as that which comes back again and again, which continues, haunt-
ingly. Morrison’s novel is about the unspeakable not only now but in the
future, slavery as a legacy still, not as something belonging to what we call
the history books.
Marx in 1848 saw communism as ‘a spectre...haunting Europe’ (the
famous opening words of The Communist Manifesto). One hundred and fifty
years later, Derrida too sees communism as spectral. Hence its rapport with
deconstruction. Deconstruction, as Derrida describes it, is concerned to
think about the sense that ‘everyone reads, acts, writes with his or herghosts’
(Derrida 1994, 139), to think about presence (and absence) as necessarily
haunted, about meaning as spectralized. In these respects, deconstruction
offers perhaps the most important contemporary theory of ghosts. Commun-
ism is like democracy itself: ‘it has always been and will remain spectral: it is
always still to come’ (Derrida 1994, 99).
Further reading
For two helpful and wide-ranging accounts of the ghostly in literature from a
‘gothic’ perspective, see David Punter, The Literature of Terror, 2ndedition
(1996), and Fred Botting, Gothic (1997). Terry Castle (1995) has a good
chapter on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century conceptions of ghosts, entitled
‘Spectral Politics: Apparition Belief and the Romantic Imagination’. For a
lucid and helpful exposition of Lacan’s notoriously difficult essay on Hamlet,
see Bruce Fink (1996). More generally, for some very good, clear and access-
ible readings of literature-with-Lacan, see Linda Ruth Williams (1995). More
complex Lacanian accounts of the literary may be found in the brilliant work168 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of Shoshana Felman (1987) and Jacqueline Rose (1996). Nicolas Abraham’s
‘Notes on the Phantom: A Complement to Freud’s Metapsychology’ and ‘The
Phantom of Hamlet or The Sixth Act, preceded by The Intermission of
“Truth”’ are collected in The Shell and the Kernel(1994). For a difficult but
thought-provoking elaboration of Abraham’s work on ghosts, see Esther
Rashkin, Family Secrets and the Psychoanalysis of Narrative(1992). For a very
rich, demanding but now classic account of spectrality and politics, focusing
on Hamlet and the writings of Karl Marx, see Jacques Derrida, Spectres of
Marx(1994). For the links between psychoanalysis, technology and telecom-
munications, see Derrida’s challenging but fascinating Archive Fever(1995a);
for an account of the cultural and philosophical importance of the telephone,
see Avital Ronell’s The Telephone Book(1989). Peter Nicholls’s essay, ‘The
Belated Postmodern: History, Phantoms and Toni Morrison’ (1996), offers
a subtle and stimulating reading of Belovedby way of many of the notions of
the ghostly discussed in this chapter. For more on American ghosts (from
the Salem witchcraft trials to contemporary film and politics), see Spectral
America: Phantoms and the National Imagination, ed. Weinstock (2004); for
ghosts and Victorian literature, see Julian Wolfreys’s Victorian Hauntings
(2002); for ghosts and modernism, see Jean-Michel Rabaté’s The Ghosts
of Modernity (1996) and Helen Sword’s Ghostwriting Modernism (2002);
and for a good collection of essays on ghosts in relation to deconstruction,
psychoanalysis and history, see Buse and Stott (1999).

19. Moving pictures
What do movies tell us about literature? Over recent decades cinema has
increasingly come to be incorporated into university literature courses
and literature professors have been pronouncing on films, as well as on novels,
poems and plays. But what do we learn about literature when we watch and
talk about film? And what do we learn about moving pictures when we study
literature? We are all familiar (if not bored to tears) with talk of ‘the film of the
book’ and even ‘the book of the film’, with discussion of how the film version
is or is not faithful to the ‘original’ book version, of whether the film is as good
as the book or vice versa. We want to get away from such talk: to put it simply,
the film of the book is a film, it’s not a book. We need a different vocabulary and
different critical perspectives. Film is, nevertheless, inextricably tied in with
the study of literature. Thinking about film provides innovative ways of think-
ing about literature, and vice versa. While the study of one informs, stimulates
and provokes the study of the other, however, we do not want to suggest that
the specificity of literature can or should be done away with. Our purpose in
this chapter is, above all, to elucidate and explore the nature of the literary
through thinking about film.
Sadly, there is no DVD or YouTube clip featuring a rendition of
Wordsworth’s great nineteenth-century autobiographical epic, The Prelude
(although YouTube does offer some pretty funny Wordsworthiana). Never-
theless, in talking about moving pictures, we would like to focus on this
poem. First published after the poet’s death in 1850, The Preludewas written
and revised between 1798 and 1839. Wordsworth began writing it, in other
words, almost a hundred years before the first film (shown by the Lumière
brothers in 1895). Not only has The Preludenot been turned into a movie,
then, but it would be unreasonable to expect Wordsworth to be interested in170 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the technologies of film production. Except for the fact that the word ‘cinema’
derives from the Greek kinema, ‘motion’, and that such precursors of the
cinema as the panorama, the ‘eidophusikon’ and the ‘diorama’ were invented
and became popular during Wordsworth’s lifetime, the idea might seem
quite deranged. But, as we hope to make clear, things are not as simple as this.
In particular, we want to suggest that The Preludeis composed or organized
around a series of ‘stills’, moments taken from the moving picture of the poet’s
own mind, the cinema of his life. Wordsworth’s poem is often regarded as the
first great autobiographical narrative in English, an account of‘the growth of a
poet’s mind’ that – in the 1805 version we will concentrate on here – stretches
over 13 books and roughly nine thousand lines of blank verse. Vital to an
understanding and appreciation of The Preludeare Wordsworth’s ‘spots of
time’, which are concerned with the effects of childhood memories on
later life.
At a key moment in Book 11 of The Prelude, Wordsworth arrests the move-
ment of his narrative, to speculate on its workings:
There are in our existence spots of time,
Which with distinct preeminence retain
A renovating virtue, whence, depressed
By false opinion and contentious thought,
Or aught of heavier or more deadly weight
In trivial occupations and the round
Of ordinary intercourse, our minds
Are nourished and invisibly repaired...
Life with me,
As far as memory can look back, is full
Of this beneficent influence.
(The Prelude1805, Book 11: 257–78)
There are certain memories, especially from early childhood, which stay with
us, and have a capacity to renew, to ‘nourish’ and ‘invisibly repair’ our minds.
‘As far as memory can look back’: Wordsworth presents his autobiography
and indeed his life in visual terms, and evokes these ‘spots of time’ as a kind of
montage of moving pictures. ‘Spots of time’ are intensely visual and emphat-
ically moving. They are arresting and affecting, moving in their stillness.
Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ can be related to moving pictures in at least
three ways. A spot of time is mobile, a matter of motion, a shifting scene.
Second, it entails a moving or agitation of the mind and feelings. (The word
‘emotion’, we may recall, is from the Latin move¯re, to stir up, to create motion.)Moving pictures 171
Finally, in a way that is not only or not simply anachronistic, we might suggest
that a spot of time resembles a movie or movie clip in terms of its apparently
closed-off or framed quality (it’s a ‘spot’), and in terms more generally of what
it allows us to think about the nature and experience of time itself. Above all
perhaps, Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ prefigure modern cinema in terms
of what Gilles Deleuze calls ‘the time-image’ (Deleuze 1989). We will try to
elucidate this idea in greater detail shortly.
Wordsworth famously declares in the Preface to Lyrical Ballads(1800) that
poetry ‘takes its origin from emotion recollected in tranquillity’ (Wordsworth
1984, 611), suggesting that it involves at once a stilling and a revision or
re-gathering of what has been moving. The phrase ‘spots of time’ likewise sug-
gests something paradoxical, a strange fixing of time in place, asplace. What,
we may ask, is the ‘time’ of a ‘spot of time’? In order to start thinking about
this we need to reckon with the ways in which Wordsworth exploits the sheer
slipperiness of poetic language. Even the brief ‘spots of time’ passage quoted
a moment ago was written and revised over a period of years. In the earliest
version, in 1799, the spots of time are said to have ‘a fructifying virtue’, a little
later ‘a vivifying virtue’, and in a third version ‘a renovating virtue’ (see The
Prelude, 428, n. 2). For all their apparent stillness or tranquillity, these ‘spots
of time’ are in motion, pictured in unstable, altering, moving language.
Let us zoom in on one of these ‘spots of time’, namely the passage in which
Wordsworth recalls the experience, as a young boy, of stealing ravens’ eggs:
Nor less in springtime, when on southern banks
The shining sun had from her knot of leaves
335 Decoyed the primrose flower, and when the vales
And woods were warm, was I a plunderer then
In the high places, on the lonesome peaks,
Where’er among the mountains and the winds
The mother-bird had built her lodge. Though mean
340 My object and inglorious, yet the end
Was not ignoble. Oh, when I have hung
Above the raven’s nest, by knots of grass
Or half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
But ill sustained, and almost, as it seemed,
345 Suspended by the blast which blew amain,
Shouldering the naked crag, oh, at that time
While on the perilous ridge I hung alone,
With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind
Blow through my ears; the sky seemed not a sky
350 Of earth, and with what motion moved the clouds!172 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The mind of man is framed even like a breath
And harmony of music...
(The Prelude1805, Book 1: 333–52)
This ‘spot of time’ apparently ends with the words ‘with what motion moved
the clouds!’ We have quoted the words that follow on from it in order to draw
attention to the remarkable, often unfathomable breaks that characteristically
splice together Wordsworth’s poetry. Having concluded his moving picture of
this spot of time, he starts a new verse-paragraph, now in a quite different tone
and place: ‘The mind of man is framed even like a breath / And harmony of
music’. But the boy Wordsworth is literally left hanging, clinging to the tiny
fissures in the rock and seeming to be held in place largely by the wind itself.
With the extraordinary editing of this moment, with this singular cliffhanger,
we are offered a fitting example of what Paul de Man calls Wordsworth’s
‘sheer language’ (de Man 1984, 92). ‘Sheer language’ means language alone,
working by itself, in the sense that our access – and indeed Wordsworth’s
access – to these memories of stealing ravens’ eggs is in and through language.
But we might also hear in ‘sheer language’ the sense of something precipitous,
vertiginously headlong. The blank on the page immediately following ‘with
what motion moved the clouds!’ figures a sort of abyss.
Wordsworth chooses to stop the spot, leaves himself (a portrait of the poet
as a young thief) on a perilous ridge, just about hanging on by ‘knots of grass
/ Or half-inch fissures in the slippery rock’. ‘Oh, when I have hung / Above’:
which way up is he? What is the point of view? This last question actually
enfolds three questions, each of them as relevant to film as to literary studies:
(1) What is the point of view in a literal sense? From what position or angle is
this being seen? (2) What is the narrative point of view? Who is seeing it and
who is describing it, and from what perspective or perspectives? (3) What is
the temporal perspective? How are issues of past, present and future involved
here? From what position in time is this ‘spot of time’ to be viewed? One of the
most important differences between literary narrative and film narrative is
that, with the former, the reader is almost always presented with a knowledge
of what is going on in the thoughts and feelings of a specific narrator or char-
acter. With literary narrative you get ‘inside information’ as to what is going on
in the mind and body of a character. This is particularly the case when the
story is told by a so-called omniscient or (perhaps more accurately) telepathic
narrator. More generally, however, a fictional exposure of ‘secret’ interiority is
at the very heart of literature and there is something strange and magical about
this – about the idea of being able to read the mind of the author, a narrator
or character. This interiority is fundamentally alien to film: the ‘eye of theMoving pictures 173
camera’ is doomed to the visible. The only way that film can provide ‘inside
information’ is through strategies or techniques from literature (the ‘telling’
voice-over, in particular).
Being John Malkovich(dir. Spike Jonze, 1999) is a witty, at moments hilar-
ious movie that ironically acknowledges and foregrounds these limits. The film
involves the discovery and exploitation of a ‘portal’ through which people
are able to enter the head of the ‘real-life’ actor and have the chance of ‘being
John Malkovich’. One of the most memorable scenes is when Malkovich
himself insists on going through the portal and finds himself (as it were) in a
dreamlike restaurant-cum-nightclub surrounded by other John Malkovichs.
At a table where a couple of John Malkovichs are dining, he looks over the
restaurant menu and sees that it consists entirely of dishes called ‘Malkovich’.
Everywhere he is confronted by a proliferation of John Malkovichs, all of
them saying (or singing) over and over again the single word ‘Malkovich’,
‘Malkovich’, ‘Malkovich’. In this cinematic hall of mirrors everyone is the
same, the name says it all, and interiority is rendered comically non-existent.
Wordsworth’s account of stealing ravens’ eggs allows us a particularly inti-
mate sense of the poet’s interior world. While Spike Jonze’s film seems at once
to celebrate and ridicule the mad narcissism of a stammering ‘Malkovich,
Malkovich, Malkovich’, Wordsworth’s poetry offers us a rather different
experience of what Keats called the ‘egotistical sublime’ (Keats 1958, 1:387).
As William Hazlitt once remarked: Wordsworth ‘sees nothing but himself
and the universe...His egotism is in some respects a madness’ (Hazlitt
1930–34, 5:163). This conception of Wordsworth corresponds, perhaps
rather unnervingly, to how Hugo Münsterberg described the impact of
cinema in his 1916 book, The Photoplay: A Psychological Study: ‘the mass-
ive outer world has lost its weight, it has been freed from space, time, and
causality, and has been clothed in the forms of our own consciousness’
(Münsterberg 1916, 220, quoted in Armstrong 1998, 240). We might be
tempted to think of Wordsworth’s account of stealing ravens’ eggs as pro-
foundly ego-centred: what else would you expect from that self-regarding
genre known as autobiography? But we would argue that the poem also goes
far beyond this obsession with self. Besides the strange and disorienting ambi-
guity of the literal ‘point of view’ of the ‘plunderer’ (above or below the sky,
upside down or right way up?), for example, there are the temporal disjunc-
tions of the scene. This ‘spot of time’ is both ‘at that time’ (l.346), in the past,
and at the same time it is in this strange ‘here and now’ of sheer language, being
written or being read, still. It is also, crucially, a moving picture that entails an
intimate sense of the unknowable and incalculable. It involves a logic of
unforeseeable becoming: ‘spots of time’ work ‘invisibly’, we are told, and go174 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
on working, work on, in the future. The scene shifts inwardly, from the present
perfect tense (‘when I have hung’ [l.341]) to the simple past (‘I hung’). The
place of the present ‘I’, the ‘I’ that recollects, speaks or writes, gives way to an
image of alien suspension, an ‘I’ blown through with ‘strange utterance’, lost
to an alien sky: ‘With what strange utterance did the loud dry wind / Blow
through my ears; the sky seemed not a sky / Of earth, and with what motion
moved the clouds!’
Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo(1958) is also a masterpiece of suspense. In the
opening sequence the protagonist Scottie (James Stewart) is seen hanging on
for dear life to the ripped guttering of a San Francisco rooftop as a police
officer, having tried to help him, plummets to his death. As Susan White puts
it: ‘we never see (or hear about) Scottie’s rescue – in a sense [he] remains hang-
ing over the edge of the precipice throughout the film’ (White 1991, 911).
Something similar happens in The Prelude: in a sense the boy trying to steal
ravens’ eggs remains hanging there throughout the rest of that epic poem. The
moment in Vertigois, we might say, weirdly Wordsworthian. On the one hand
it is difficult not to project (the word is as much cinematic as psychoanalytic)
back on to the past, on to literary works of the pre-film era, critical ideas and
perspectives generated by film. On the other, it is striking how many of our
current ways of thinking were in fact already quite firmly established in the
nineteenth century.
Had he still been living when cinema began, Wordsworth would have been
at once fascinated and appalled. With its intimations of cinematicity, however,
The Prelude also suggests that he would not have been entirely surprised
either. Wordsworth’s poem communicates the power of ocularcentrism,
of what he calls ‘The state.../ In which the eye was master of the heart...
The most despotic of our senses’ (Book 11: 170–3). The quasi-hypnotic draw
of twenty-first-century ‘visual culture’ (TV, video, cinema, DVD, computer
games, and so on) was, we might say, already in play in Wordsworth’s day.
Thus the poet reminisces, for example, about ‘Still craving combinations of
new forms, / New pleasure, wider empire for the sight’ (Book 11: 191–2). And
while, in his amazing account of life in London (in Book 7), he conveys a moral
disapproval of such newfangled visual pleasures as panoramas and ‘mimic
sights that ape / The absolute presence of reality’ (Book 7: 248–9), his own
depiction of the city and its inhabitants is achieved through a series of moving
pictures. In this way he evokes London as ‘the quick dance / Of colours, lights
and forms, the Babel din, / The endless stream of men and moving things’
(Book 7: 156–8). And in one of the most memorable encounters anywhere in
his poetry, Wordsworth picks out – or feels uncannily picked out by – a blind
beggar ‘amid the moving pageant’ (Book 7: 610). The ‘spectacle’ at the centre
of this ‘moving pageant’ is reproduced and interiorized in turn as a movingMoving pictures 175
picture, a kind of monstrous mill in Wordsworth’s mind: ‘My mind did at
this spectacle turn round / As with the might of waters...I looked, / As if
admonished from another world’ (ll.616–23).
In another ‘spot of time’ in The Prelude, Wordsworth recalls when, aged
five, he is out riding with a servant (or ‘guide’) called James, becomes separ-
ated from him and stumbles on alone, down to a valley where ‘in former times
/ A murderer had been hung in iron chains’ (Book 11: 288–9). Nearby he
comes across the eerie graffiti of ‘fresh and visible’ letters scored in the turf
where ‘Some unknown hand had carved the murderer’s name’ (l.293). He
quickly quits this ‘spot’, ‘reascending the bare common’ (ll.301–2), approach-
ing ‘A naked pool that lay beneath the hills’ (l.303) overlooked by a summit
with a stone beacon on top. Closer at hand, he sees a windblown girl bearing a
pitcher on her head. And, all of a sudden, he is halted at this sight:
It was, in truth,
An ordinary sight, but I should need
Colours and words that are unknown to man
To paint the visionary dreariness
Which, while I looked all round for my lost guide,
Did at that time invest the naked pool,
The beacon on the lonely eminence,
The woman, and her garments vexed and tossed
By the strong wind. (Book 11: 307–15)
Wordsworth writes of painting with colours and words that are unknown (not
yet, perhaps never to be, invented), as if it were a matter of something fixed, the
landscape painting of a visionary dreariness (in effect, a seeing of seeing, a
vision of visionariness); and yet, as with the earlier passage we encountered
(‘with what motion moved the clouds!’), it is at the same time explicitly a ques-
tion of a moving picture (the girl’s ‘garments vexed and tossed / By the strong
wind’). Wordsworth’s ‘spots of time’ are concerned with senses of movement
that have yet to be captured in colours or words.
In this respect his writing offers a singular twist to the classic tradition of
ut pictura poesis, in which painting and poetry are regarded as ‘sister arts’,
painting being seen as a kind of mute poetry and poetry a speaking picture. In
his Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres(1759–83), Hugh Blair echoes this
tradition when he argues that ‘a true poet makes us imagine that we see [the
object or natural landscape] before our eyes; he catches the distinguishing
features; he gives it the colours of life and reality; he places it in such a light that
a painter could copy it after him’ (Blair 1842, 549). Wordsworth’s concern
is rather with the sense of an impossible word-painting, with a sense of the
impossibility of ekphrasis(a verbal representation of the visual). He is moved176 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
by a vision he can neither paint nor describe, that is not yet realized or realiz-
able. In this way we might suggest that Wordsworth’s spots of time are con-
cerned with that sense of ‘moving’ evoked in the ‘Intimations’ ode, where the
child is described as ‘Moving about in worlds not realized’. They are (about)
moving pictures, visions in process, still to be realized, as well as sights that
move, disturb, exhilarate, stir the emotions.
Finally, our attempt to explore the moving pictures ofWordsworth’s ‘spots
of time’ might helpfully be illuminated by brief discussion of the work of the
philosopher Gilles Deleuze (1925–95). Deleuze has provided perhaps the
most provocative account of cinema in recent decades. His books Cinema 1:
The Movement-Image(Deleuze 1986) and Cinema 2: The Time-Image(Deleuze
1989) are complex and challenging, in particular because he argues that
cinema alters the very nature of thinking, writing and philosophy. Elaborating
on the work of Henri Bergson, Deleuze contends that the universe becomes
‘a cinema in itself, a metacinema’ (Deleuze 1986, 59). With cinema, Deleuze
argues, we see‘seeing’. It is no longer a question of‘point of view’, of someone’s
(a character’s or a director’s) point of view. The eye of the camera is not an ‘I’.
As Claire Colebrook glosses it: ‘What makes the machine-like movement of
the cinema so important is that the camera can “see” or “perceive” without
imposing concepts. The camera does not organise images from a fixed point
but itself moves across movements’ (Colebrook 2002, 32). Related to this
is what Deleuze calls the ‘time-image’, that is to say the way in which cinema
presents us with a thinking or experience of time cut off from any question of a
succession of past-present-future.
The time-image is not an image ofsomething, it is what comes about with
the effects of ‘false continuity and irrational cuts’ (Deleuze 1989, xi), for ex-
ample with a certain disjunctiveness of seeing and hearing. Such disjunctive-
ness is evident from the very start of Hitchcock’s Vertigo, as we are presented
with the spiralling graphics and seeing of seeing in Kim Novak’s eye, Bernard
Herrmann’s madly melodramatic, ‘irrational’ soundtrack accompanying us
into the opening realization of vertigo in the image of Scottie hanging from the
rooftop. The opening of Vertigoillustrates the distinctiveness of the cinematic
image which, according to Deleuze, involves ‘a dissociation of the visual and
the sound’ (Deleuze 1989, 256). And although it is a poem, something like
this vertiginous ‘dissociation’ might be read back into Wordsworth’s juxta-
position of the unearthly sky and moving motion of the clouds and the ‘strange
utterance’ of ‘the loud dry wind’ as his younger self clings to the ‘slippery
rock’ in The Prelude.
Deleuze’s work engages with new kinds of thinking, writing and becoming.
His books on cinema, along with his writings on literary texts, challenge usMoving pictures 177
with the question: how should we think, read and write about literature after
cinema, or with what we have learnt from cinema in mind? And, indeed, what
new kinds of literary writing might be envisaged? Leo Tolstoy appears to
have foreseen such questions when he commented in 1908, a year before he
died and almost twenty years before the first talkies:
[cinema] will make a revolution in our life – in the life of writers...We
shall have to adapt ourselves to the shadowy screen and to the cold
machine. A new form of writing will be necessary...This swift change of
scene, this blending of emotion and experience – it is much better than the
heavy, long-drawn-out kind of writing to which we are accustomed. It is
closer to life. In life, too, changes and transitions flash before our eyes,
and emotions of the soul are like a hurricane. The cinema has divined the
mystery of motion. And that is its greatness. (Tolstoy, quoted in Murphet
and Rainford 2003, 1)
As Colin MacCabe remarks, in a recent essay entitled ‘On Impurity: the
Dialectics of Cinema and Literature’, ‘it is impossible to give a serious account
of any twentieth-century writer without reference to cinema’ (MacCabe 2003,
16). This is the case not only with such cinematically self-conscious writers as
John Dos Passos, Gabriel García Márquez or Salman Rushdie, but also with
writers such as Virginia Woolf, James Joyce and T.S. Eliot. In an interview
entitled ‘The Brain Is the Screen’ (1986), Deleuze uses cinema to make some
illuminating remarks about works of art in general. He offers a compelling
vision of the nature of literary works, the future of moving pictures and
‘new emotions’:
A work of art always entails the creation of new spaces and times (it’s not a
question of recounting a story in a well-determined space and time; rather,
it is the rhythms, the lighting, and the space-times themselves that must
become the true characters). A work should bring forth the problems and
questions that concern us rather than provide answers. A work of art is a
new syntax, one that is much more important than vocabulary and that
excavates a foreign language in language. Syntax in cinema amounts to the
linkages and relinkages of images, but also to the relation between sound
and the visual image. If one had to define culture, one could say that it [con-
sists in] perceiving that works of art are much more concrete, moving, and
funny than commercial products. In creative works there is a multiplication
of emotion, a liberation of emotion, and even the invention of new emo-
tions. This distinguishes creative works from the prefabricated emotions of
commerce. (Deleuze 2000, 370)178 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
If it is impossible to read modernist and postmodern literature without engag-
ing with questions of cinema, it is also the case that we can no longer read
Wordsworth without doing so through the kinds of thinking that cinema
makes possible. At the same time, it is part of the cryptic and enduring power
of Wordsworth’s poetry, and of his ‘spots of time’ in particular, that they can
continue to give us new ways of thinking about emotions, liberating and
inventing in moving pictures.
Further reading
Literature and Visual Technologies: Writing After Cinema, eds. Murphet
and Rainford (2003) is a valuable collection of essays on the comparatively
new field of reading film through literature and literature through film. For
two valuable recent studies especially concerned with cinema and Modernist
literature, see Laura Marcus’s The Tenth Muse: Writing About Cinema in the
Modernist Period(2007) and David Trotter’s Cinema and Modernism(2007).
For two other critical works that, like the present chapter, are concerned with
thinking about literature in relation to the history and prehistory of cinema,
see Bill Readings’s ‘Milton at the Movies’ (in Readings and Schaber 1993)
and Grahame Smith’s Dickens and the Dream of Cinema (2003). Gilles
Deleuze’s Cinema 2: The Time-Image(1989) is a fascinating and profound
study, though certainly not easy on a first encounter. Claire Colebrook’s intro-
ductory book, Gilles Deleuze(2002), is a lucid and invaluable guide to this
difficult but important thinker. For a recent collection of essays more speci-
fically focusing on Deleuze and the literary, see Buchanan and Marks (2000).
For important more recent work on cinema and time, see Philip Rosen’s
Change Mummified(2001), Mary Ann Doane’s The Emergence of Cinematic
Time (2002) and Laura Mulvey’s Death 24x a Second: Stillness and the
Moving Image(2006). On the power of the eye and vision, see (so to speak)
Martin Jay’s monumental The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century
French Thought (1993), and, more generally in relation to textuality, the
fine range of essays collected in Vision and Textuality (eds Melville and
Readings, 1995). For a recent study of feeling, affect and being moved, see
Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s Touching Feeling (2003). For excellent accounts
of the long-standing literary-critical tradition of interest in the interaction
of word and image, see Mitchell, ‘Iconology’ (1986) and ‘Picture Theory’
(1994), Krieger, ‘Ekphrasis’ (1992), and Heffernan, ‘Museum of Words’
(1993). For a fine account of Romanticism and visuality, see Sophie Thomas’s
book of that title (2008).

20. Sexual difference
John laughs at me, of course, but one expects that in marriage.
John is practical in the extreme. He has no patience with faith, an intense
horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of things not to be felt
and seen and put down in figures.
John is a physician, and perhaps—(I would not say it to a living soul, of
course, but this is dead paper and a great relief to my mind)—perhapsthat is
one reason I do not get well faster.
You see he does not believe I am sick! (9–10)
T
his passage from Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s short story The Yellow
Wallpaper (1892) presents a number of important issues concerning
sexual difference. In particular, it dramatizes conventional presuppositions
about the differences between men and women. The phrase ‘of course’ may
signal that the first sentence is satirical and ironic, but the implication remains:
a woman is subordinate to her husband and cannot expect to be taken seri-
ously. The differences between men and women, in this passage, are primarily
a matter of recognizing certain kinds of gender stereotypes. Such stereotypes
depend to a considerable extent on a conceptual opposition: man versus
woman. And, like other binary oppositions, this involves a hierarchy. John,
the man, is active, ‘practical’, dominant, unemotional. The narrator, the
woman, appears to be passive, non-practical, subordinate, emotional. The
opposition between the man and the woman is underscored by the insistent
stress on the man’s actions, qualities and characteristics (John does this, John
is such-and-such) and the corresponding absence of information regarding
the woman. Gilman is exposing a hierarchy, in other words, involving the180 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
dominance of the man and the subordination of the woman. The Yellow
Wallpaperhas become something of a modern classic as regards the literary
representation of women and the idea of what Elaine Showalter has called, in
a book of that name, ‘A Literature of Their Own’.
The Yellow Wallpaper is a first-person narrative which tells the story of
a woman whose husband insists that, because she is ill, she must remain
confined in a room with revolting yellow wallpaper in a large old house where
the couple and their baby are staying for the summer. The woman narrates the
frightening process whereby she comes to believe that there is some other
woman in the room, a woman behind or inside the wallpaper. The text culmin-
ates with the demonic turn by which she has becomethe woman behind the
wallpaper but has got out. The husband comes into the room to discover his
wife creeping around the walls: ‘Now why should that man have fainted? But
he did, and right across my path by the wall, so that I had to creep over him
every time!’ (36)
The Yellow Wallpaperoffers a particularly striking example of what Sandra
Gilbert and Susan Gubar talk about as ‘the madwoman in the attic’ (Gilbert
and Gubar 1979). The story is a dramatic and powerfully ironic account of
how a woman is repressed, confined and ultimately driven crazy, specifically
by her husband, but more generally by the violence of patriarchy. It is no coin-
cidence, therefore, that The Yellow Wallpapershould have been written by a
woman known in her own lifetime for her contribution to the women’s move-
ment in the United States and, in particular, for her work of non-fiction,
Women and Economics(1898). The Yellow Wallpapercan be read as a power-
ful satire on patriarchal society and values. In particular it emphasizes the ways
in which violence against women need not be physical in a literal sense,
but can nevertheless be all-pervading. It is what we could call the soft face
of oppression that is satirically presented, for example, when the narrator
notes: ‘[John] is very careful and loving, and hardly lets me stir without
special direction’ (12). Or when she says: ‘It is so hard to talk with John about
my case, because he is so wise, and because he loves me so’ (23). As these
remarks indicate, the text is also about the woman’s collusion in her
confinement and in her oppressed state. The text explores the ways in which
the problem of patriarchy has not only to do with the behaviour of men but
also, just as urgently, with that of women.
All literary texts can be thought about in terms of how they represent
gender difference and how far they may be said to reinforce or question gender-
role stereotypes. Take, for example, an early sixteenth-century sonnet, such as
Thomas Wyatt’s ‘Whoso List to Hunt’:Sexual difference 181
Whoso list to hunt, I know where is an hind,
But as for me, alas, I may no more.
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore
I am of them that farthest cometh behind.
Yet may I, by no means, my wearied mind
Draw from the deer, but as she fleeth afore,
Fainting I follow. I leave off therefore,
Since in a net I seek to hold the wind.
Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt,
As well as I, may spend his time in vain.
And graven with diamonds in letters plain
There is written, her fair neck round about,
‘Noli me tangere, for Caesar’s I am,
And wild for to hold, though I seem tame.’
Wyatt’s sonnet figures men and women in a number of gender-stereotypical
ways. Man is the hunter, woman is the hunted. Man is the subject, active, full
of ‘travail’, whereas woman is the object; indeed she is not even figured as
human but instead as ‘an hind’, a female deer. Moreover Wyatt’s poem
integrates this gender-stereotyping within its very structure of address. The
poem, that is to say, is addressed to men (to those who wish, or ‘list’, to hunt),
not to women: in this way it appears to offer a classic example of the construc-
tion or assumption of the reader as male. Gilman’s short story and Wyatt’s
sonnet are radically different kinds of text, written at completely different per-
iods and from within almost unimaginably heterogeneous cultures (England
in the early sixteenth century, the United States in the late nineteenth century).
Yet they do offer significant parallels. Both in their quite different ways invite
us to reflect critically on the question of gender and more particularly on the
power of gender-stereotypes. In both texts, we encounter such stereotypes
(I am a woman and therefore subordinate, passive, hysterical, an object, etc.),
but we are also provoked to a questioning of the very idea of gender opposition
as such.
On one level, then, there is a valuable and perhaps unavoidable reading of
literary texts in terms of essentialism: there is essentially one form of sexual dif-
ference and that is the difference between male and female, boys and girls, men
and women. The notion of essentialism here consists primarily in anatomical
or biological difference: the man has a penis, whereas the woman does not,
or the woman has a pudendum, breasts and a childbearing capacity whereas
the man has none of these. Various kinds of gender-stereotypes are then articu-
lated, as it were, on to this essentialism: the male is strong, active, rational,182 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the female is weak, passive, irrational and so forth. Within the logic of this
description – which has dominated the history of Western culture – having a
penis seems to have been so important that it becomes appropriate to speak
of its symbolicsignificance, in other words, to speak of the phallus. Texts or
particular aspects of texts can then be described not only in terms of the patri-
archal but also in terms of the phallocentric or phallogocentric. Patriarchy
involves upholding the supposed priority of the male. In Gilman’s text, for
example, John is the head (or patriarch) of the family, he makes the decisions
and rules the household. The notion of phallocentrism, on the other hand,
involves some of the more subtle, more symbolic and perhaps more funda-
mental ways in which the phallus can be equated with power, authority,
presence, and the right to possession. The ‘logo’ of ‘phallogocentrism’ points
us towards the argument (promoted by theorists such as Jacques Derrida,
Hélène Cixous and Luce Irigaray) that the very notions of truth, reason,
rationality, the proper, meaning, etc. are phallocentric. Jonathan Culler has
summarized this as follows:
Numerous aspects of criticism, including the preference for metaphor over
metonymy, the conception of the author, and the concern to distinguish
legitimate from illegitimate meanings, can be seen as part of the promotion
of the paternal. Phallogocentrism unites an interest in patriarchal authority,
unity of meaning, and certainty of origin. (Culler 1983, 61)
It is in this context, then, that the French theorist Irigaray speculates on the
possibilities of kinds of language that would somehow break with the mascu-
line. As she remarks:
a feminine language would undo the unique meaning, the proper meaning
of words, of nouns: which still regulates all discourse. In order for there
to be a proper meaning, there must indeed be a unity somewhere. But if
feminine language cannot be brought back to any unity, it cannot be simply
described or defined. (Irigaray 1977, 65)
As may already be clear from these very brief accounts of phallocentrism
and phallogocentrism, reading literary texts in terms of sexual difference can
be more complex and demanding than simply recognizing the gender opposi-
tions and hierarchies to be found at work in a text. As feminist criticism has
established, such kinds of recognition are crucial. Inevitably perhaps, we tend
to start from an essentialist position and our reading of literary texts is guided
by this. But what is most important about literary representations of gender isSexual difference 183
not merely that a particular text can be shown to be sexist or phallocentric, or
even feminist. Rather it is that literary texts call into question many of our
essentialist ideas about gender.
In other words, it could be argued that there is no such thing as a feminist,
or a masculinist or a sexist, literary work in itself: it all depends on how it is
read. An obvious example here would be the work of D.H. Lawrence. Kate
Millett’s Sexual Politics (1969) was a groundbreaking book because of the
acuity and passion with which it attacked Lawrence’s (and other male writers’)
work for its ‘phallic consciousness’ (238) and degradation of women. Millett’s
account still makes powerful reading, but it is also in important respects
reductive – especially in its author-centred representations of the novels it dis-
cusses. For Millett, that is to say, the aim of literary criticism is to criticize the
male author – a figure whose male voice, male presence and male ideas are
unequivocally clear, for Millett, in everything Lawrence wrote. More recently,
however, critics have tended to focus more on the tensions and paradoxes
within Lawrence’s writings in themselves, rather than on the author-figure
thought to be looming behind them. Critics such as Leo Bersani (1978) and
Jonathan Dollimore (1991) have thus emphasized the idea of Lawrence’s
texts as in many ways working against themselves and as unsettling various
assumptions that we may have (or Lawrence may have had) about gender
as such. Thus Dollimore, for example, focuses on the fact that ‘so much [in
Lawrence’s work] is fantasized from the position of the woman...and in a
voice that is at once blindingly heterosexist and desperately homoerotic’
(Dollimore 1991, 275).
We can consider these points by looking again at the Gilman and Wyatt
texts. As we have suggested, The Yellow Wallpaperreads, on one level at least,
as a literary case-study in the oppression and repression of a middle-class
white woman in the United States in the late nineteenth century. It may be read
as a dynamic feminist demand for liberation from the maddening claustro-
phobia of patriarchy. But the text is at the same time powerfully equivocal.
For instance, simply in terms of the narrative and its conclusion, we must ask
ourselves: how much of an affirmation is it, if the only possible liberation for
a woman is madness? Is it possible to speak on behalf of women from the
position of madness? If, as the narrative of Gilman’s text implies, the only
way out of patriarchy is to fall, or creep, into madness, is there in fact any
way out at all? Isn’t The Yellow Wallpaperas much caught up in the net of
the patriarchal as, say, Henry Miller’s Sexus(1949)? Such questions are not
meant as a way of closing downthe Gilman text by reducing it to the transmis-
sion of a merely negative message about the position of women in relation to
patriarchy. Rather they are questions which the text itself can be said to pose:184 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
to read The Yellow Wallpapercritically is to engage with its equivocality, with
its ironic and complex refigurations of essentialist notions of gender.
In this context it is not surprising that some of the most provocative fem-
inist criticism since the mid-1970s has been closely bound up with what is
referred to as deconstruction. Deconstruction could be defined as a strategy
of disruption and transformation with regard to every and any kind of essent-
ialism. ‘Essentialism’ here would include, for example, the assumption that
everyone is irreversibly either male or female, that the literal is inescapably
different from the figurative, that speech is fundamentally different from writ-
ing and so on. In particular, deconstruction involves the desedimentation of
those conceptual oppositions through which essentialism operates. In the
first place this has meant inverting the hierarchy of male and female, masculine
and feminine, father and mother, phallic and (for example) clitoral, along with
related couplings such as strong and weak, active and passive, rational and
irrational, practical and impractical, presence and absence. Deconstruction,
however, is about recognizing that philosophical oppositions are never in
‘peaceful coexistence’: it is always a matter, as Derrida says, of ‘a violent hier-
archy’ (Derrida 1981, 41). Deconstruction entails not only the inversion or
overturning of hierarchies but also the transformation of the basis on which
they have operated. This might be thought about in relation to the passage
from The Yellow Wallpaperwith which we began this chapter. The narrator
tells us: ‘John is practical in the extreme. He has no patience with faith,
an intense horror of superstition, and he scoffs openly at any talk of things
not to be felt and seen and put down in figures’ (9). What we have here is an
apparently straightforward assertion of the physician husband’s practicality
and rationalism, implicitly contrasted with the narrator’s own lack of these
qualities. But on another level the passage might be said to disturb and even
transform the very basis on which we presume to talk about the practical and
impractical, the rational and irrational. After all, as George Eliot’s great novel
Daniel Deronda(1876) rhetorically asks: ‘Who supposes that it is an imposs-
ible contradiction to be superstitious and rationalising at the same time?’ (48).
Indeed, as Gilman’s text here intimates, rationalism can be construed as
in turn a kind of superstition. To ‘scoff openly’, as John does, suggests exag-
geration and defensiveness. To have ‘an intense horror of superstition’ is itself
perhaps a mark of superstitiousness. There is, in short, an unsettling of the
grounds of reason (here and elsewhere) in Gilman’s text: this is deconstructive
in the sense that it is specifically concerned with a questioning and dislocation
of the logic of non-contradiction. It is interested in disturbing what is perhaps
the founding claim of Western philosophy, namely Aristotle’s proposal that ‘it
is impossible for anything at the same time to be and not to be’ (Aristotle 1941,Sexual difference 185
737). This ‘law of contradiction’ is, as Paul de Man puts it, ‘the most certain
of all principles’ (de Man 1979, 120). Deconstructive feminism puts this
founding claim into question. It is rather like the Freudian argument that the
unconscious knows no contradictions: one can dream of a compound figure,
for example, someone who is (say) both your mother and not your mother
but someone else at the same time. Feminism in its deconstructive mode,
then, undermines the very basis on which identity and non-identity are
constructed. A deconstructive reading of The Yellow Wallpaper, for example,
might elaborate on the logic whereby the narrator is both mad and not mad
at the same time. The narrator both is and is not the woman behind the
wallpaper. The narrator both is and is not herself.
Since the late 1960s, feminism has revolutionized literary and cultural
studies. But, as recent critical work such as Judith Butler’s suggests, the polit-
ical force of feminism remains limited so long as it promotes itself as an ‘iden-
tity politics’ (politics based on identifying oneself with a particular, usually
marginalized and oppressed, group). The problem with the essentialism or
(in Butler’s terms) the foundationalism of ‘identity politics’ is that ‘it pre-
sumes, fixes, and constrains the very “subjects” that it hopes to represent and
liberate’ (Butler 1990, 148). The subjects who empower themselves through
‘identity politics’ are in some sense disempowered by their very subjection to
it. This, in part, is why we have titled this chapter ‘Sexual difference’ rather
than, say, ‘Gender and identity’. What the term ‘sexual difference’ may use-
fully gesture towards, then, is the idea that identity itself is perhaps most
productively and critically seen as fissured, haunted, at odds with itself. As
Derrida has remarked, ‘an identity is never given, received, or attained’: the
assertion of identity always betrays a ‘disorder of identity’ (Derrida 1998, 28,
14). ‘Sexual difference’ involves not only difference between but difference
within. In this context, we should perhaps try to think in terms of sexual
differences (plural), rather than any simply oppositional sexual difference
(singular). We are, in Julia Kristeva’s resonant phrase, ‘strangers to ourselves’
(Kristeva 1991). The Yellow Wallpapercould be seen to enact or allegorize this
notion of difference within. That is to say, it subverts the idea of identity itself,
in its presentation of a woman who is, in a sense, uncannily double, always
already inhabited by another, in this case the woman behind the wallpaper.
The text thus prompts us to ask: what is a woman (and conversely, what is a
man) if she is double within herself?
This sort of disruption or subversion of identity is further suggested at the
level of writingitself. The narrator of The Yellow Wallpaperpresents herself
as a writer. This is indicated in the passage we cited at the beginning of this
chapter: ‘I would not say it to a living soul, of course, but this is dead paper186 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
and a great relief to my mind.’ The narrator attests to her own ‘imaginative
power and habit of story-making’ (15). With this in mind we could suggest
the following hypothesis: wherever there is writing, sexual or gender identity
becomes equivocal, questionable, open to transformation. The hypothesis
might be considered in relation to Thomas Wyatt’s ‘Whoso list to hunt’. We
have suggested earlier how clearly this poem seems to categorize and dis-
tinguish between men and women, even to the extent of postulating its very
addressee as a male. A conventional response to this poem is, in the first
instance at least, firmly guided by essentialist and oppositional thinking:
man vs. woman, hunter vs. hunted, etc. Originally, of course, Wyatt’s poem
would have circulated privately among a small group of aristocratic men. And
indeed, as Marguerite Waller has remarked in her reading of this poem, even
in the twentieth century the critical tendency has been to deny ‘the position of
any reader who is not male, heterosexual, and politically privileged’ (Waller
1987, 6). But there are other ways in which to think about this poem and to
appreciate that, like other literary works, it can be seen to call into question
various essentialist ideas and assumptions. For example, through its
implicit elision of a female reader it provokes the questions: How should a
woman read this poem? Is it possible that the apparent absenceof women as
addressees might be construed as a testament to the idea that a woman reader
is precisely what the poem calls for but cannot have, and that this strange
absence is figured in the rhetoric of the poem itself, for instance in the image
of trying to hold the wind in a net? Is the wind that is woman more or less
powerful than the net? Is the net of patriarchy that we mentioned earlier only
so much wind in turn?
Or to put these questions in a somewhat different form: To whom does
writing belong? The idea that writing (and therefore literature in general) is
a site of questioning and possible transformation of sexual or gender iden-
tity applies to both the Wyatt sonnet as a whole and to its final couplet in
particular:
‘Noli me tangere, for Caesar’s I am,
And wild for to hold, though I seem tame.’
Whose words are these? To whom are they addressed? Such writing, ‘graven
with diamonds in letters plain’, renders paradoxical the distinctions between
man and woman, man and man (the speaker and Caesar), the touchable and
untouchable, wild and tame, addressor and addressee.
Literary texts at once encourage and exceed essentialist or identity-
oriented readings. By rendering the nature of sexual identity fundamentallySexual difference 187
questionable they provide a particularly disturbing as well as exhilarating
space in which to reflect on the question that Foucault asks in the context of the
memoirs of Herculine Barbin, a nineteenth-century French hermaphrodite:
‘Do we truly need a true sex?’ (Foucault 1980b, 3).
Further reading
Joseph Bristow’s Sexuality(1997) provides a very clear and helpful account
of contemporary theories of sexual desire and how these frame issues
of identity and difference; see also Claire Colebrook’s Gender (2004) and
Glover and Kaplan, Genders(2000). Specifically on literature, sexuality and
modernism, see Joseph Allen Boone’s Libidinal Currents: Sexuality and the
Shaping of Modernism(1998). For accessible and clear accounts of contem-
porary feminist criticism and theory, see Toril Moi, Sexual/Textual Politics
(1985) and Rita Felski, Literature After Feminism(2003). For more challeng-
ing and radical views, see Judith Butler’s Gender Trouble(1990) and Bodies
that Matter (1993), and Anne-Emmanuelle Berger’s ‘Sexing Differences’
(2005). Speaking of Gender (Showalter, ed., 1989) is a good collection of
essays on gender, and Warhol and Herndl, eds, Feminisms(1997) is a com-
prehensive collection of over seventy classic and more recent essays on differ-
ent aspects of feminist literary criticism and theory. Another good collection,
oriented towards rethinking gender from within, is Sexual Sameness(Bristow
1992b). See, too, in this context, Jonathan Dollimore’s wide-ranging and
provocative study, Sexual Dissidence (1991). Finally, for an important his-
torical account of ‘woman’, see Denise Riley, Am I That Name?(1988).

21. God
John Lennon, playing his celestially white piano, begins the song entitled
‘God’ (1970) by singing: ‘God is a concept / by which we measure / our
pain’. What kind of concept is God? In this chapter we propose to explore this
question and its relation to literature. In doing this we shall try to emphasize
not only that literature is pervasively concerned with religious themes but also
that the ways in which we think, read and write about literature are likewise
pervaded by religious – and particularly Judaeo-Christian – ideas. The con-
cept of God, in other words, has as much to do with the practice of literary
criticism as with the nature of literature. Let us give three very brief instances.
The most famous atheist in the history of English poetry, Percy Bysshe
Shelley, asserts that ‘A poem is the very image of life expressed in its eternal
truth’ (Shelley 1977, 485): in the phrase ‘eternal truth’, Shelley is being reli-
gious. In his Preface to Poems (1853), Matthew Arnold writes of the name
‘Shakespeare’ that it is ‘a name the greatest perhaps of all poetical names; a
name never to be mentioned without reverence’ (Arnold 1965, 599): with the
word ‘reverence’, Arnold is being religious. Finally, in his essay ‘Tradition and
the Individual Talent’ (1919), T.S. Eliot declares that ‘The progress of an
artist is a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality’ (Eliot
1975, 40): by appealing to ‘self-sacrifice’, Eliot is being religious.
We would like to try to approach the question of ‘God’ and literary studies
by presenting, in a gesture familiar from religious discourse, a series of six
edicts. As we hope will become clear, these edicts are not cut in stone. Nor do
they add up to a list of systematic principles or rules. Although we write in the
rhetorical form of the edict, we wish to make clear that, with respect to God
at least, we have absolutely no authority whatsoever to proclaim anything at
all. Our aim, as elsewhere in this book, is to provoke questions and further
discussion, not to close them off or close them down.God 189
First edict: God is an anthropomorphism
As we have noted elsewhere (for instance in Chapter 5), anthropomorphism is
the rhetorical term by which something that is nothuman is attributed with the
form or shape (Greek, morphe) of the human (anthropos). More specifically, as
Nietzsche, Freud and others have argued, God is a projection of the human
ego on to the surrounding universe. And it comes as no surprise to find that
this ego or ‘me’ writ extremely large is, almost invariably, male. It is in this
context that Freud suggests that God (here primarily the Judaeo-Christian
God) is a kind of hyperbolic father-figure. He proposes that God is ‘a father-
substitute; or, more correctly...he is an exalted father...he is a copy of the
father as he is seen and experienced in childhood’ (Freud 1985c, 399). God is
the figure of authority, the great progenitor, the Big Daddy who is sometimes
angry (Old Testament), sometimes loving (New Testament). If one thinks for
a moment about the idea of God as ‘she’, one might quickly sense the whole
edifice of traditional Christianity tremble. This is no doubt the reason for the
frisson of amusement that may accompany the reading of this car-sticker:
‘When God made men-drivers she was only joking!’ God, then, is not it: God
is ‘he’ or, if you want to get people’s backs up, ‘she’. Either way, God would
seem to be inconceivable without anthropomorphism.
Second edict: God is dead
This proposition is linked most often with the philosophy of Nietzsche, but
it can be understood more generally in relation to the impact on European
culture of biblical (especially German) scholarship and of (mainly British
and German) fossil discoveries and subsequent developments in the theory of
evolution in the nineteenth century. By the mid-nineteenth century it had
become clear, at least to a significant number of educated European people,
that the Bible was a tendentious collection of writings, many of which simply
could no longer be trusted in terms of their historical fact and accuracy. The
study of fossils made it impossible to suppose that the earth could be, as the
Bible propounds, only a few thousand years old. Most famously, Charles
Darwin’s On the Origin of Species(1859) offered a far more empirically and
historically convincing account of how human beings came about and, at the
same time, served to cut God out of the equation. Poets and novelists of all
sorts were obliged to reckon with what J. Hillis Miller (in a book of that title)
refers to as ‘the disappearance of God’. It is this sense of disappearance that
Matthew Arnold evokes in ‘Dover Beach’ (written around 1851), when he
describes the retreating ‘sea of faith’:190 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The Sea of Faith
Was once, too, at the full, and round earth’s shore
Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furled.
But now I only hear
Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,
Retreating, to the breath
Of the night wind, down the vast edges drear
And naked shingles of the world.
European culture, at least according to this story, has become increasingly
secularized.
Of course things are inevitably more complex than this. Even to acknow-
ledge, for example, that ‘God is dead’ is to think in anthropomorphic terms,
and to imply that ‘He’ was once alive rather than that ‘He’ never existed. The
notion of the death of God runs into difficulties in many ways similar to those
regarding the notion of the death of the author (see Chapter 3, above). As
Virginia Woolf notes, in a somewhat different context: ‘It is far harder to kill a
phantom than a reality’ (Woolf 1942, 151).
Third edict: to acknowledge the idea that God is an
anthropomorphism or that he is dead is not the same
as getting rid of him
As Roland Barthes makes clear, the idea of God is inescapably linked to ideas
of truth, presence, revelation and meaning in general. In this respect, the issue
of God is liable to creep into the discussion of literary texts, wherever ques-
tions of meaning, truth and so on are at stake. Barthes sees the notion of the
author as interdependent with that of God. And he presses for a theory and
practice of literature that would no longer be theological, declaring:
The space of writing is to be ranged over, not pierced; writing ceaselessly
posits meaning ceaselessly to evaporate it, carrying out a systematic exemp-
tion of meaning. In precisely this way literature (it would be better from now
on to say writing), by refusing to assign a ‘secret’, an ultimate meaning,
to the text (and to the world as text), liberates what may be called an anti-
theological activity, an activity that is truly revolutionary since to refuse
to fix meaning is, in the end, to refuse God and his hypostases – reason,
science, law. (Barthes 1977a, 147)
The intimate linkage between ‘God’ and ‘meaning’ is implicit in the Bible,
in the opening sentence of the Gospel according to St John: ‘In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God’ (JohnGod 191
1: 1). The original Greek for ‘Word’ here is ‘logos’, which means not only
‘word’ but also ‘sense’ or ‘meaning’. It is in this context that we might consider
the notion of what Jacques Derrida has called logocentrism, in other words, the
entire system (of Western thought, culture and philosophy) that is implicitly
or explicitly governed by notions of essential and stable meaning and ulti-
mately by what Derrida refers to as a transcendental signified (God, for ex-
ample). To put this more specifically in terms of literary texts, we could say
that perhaps our greatest desire in reading a poem or a novel is to know what it
‘means’. Knowing what the text ‘means’ has often been seen as synonymous,
for example, with knowing what the author (who here becomes a sort of sub-
stitute for God) meant by writing it. No doubt a crucial part of reading and
doing criticism concerns precisely such a ‘theological’ activity. What Barthes
helps us to see, however, is that this activity is theologicalin the sense that it
presupposes a single, stable and authoritative centre.
Barthes’s account is appealing – for instance in its associating literature,
or writing, with the ‘truly revolutionary’ – but it is also in certain respects
problematic. While he is doubtless right to link literature with notions of rev-
olution, anarchy, transgression and liberation, his own phraseology remains,
at least to some extent, complicit with what it claims to be rejecting or refusing.
Just as an atheist could be said to be complying with a kind of theistic thinking
through the very gesture of denial (you cannot say, for example, that God does
not exist without presupposing a kind of ultimate knowledge of the universe),
so the idea of ‘an anti-theological activity’ inevitably remains bound up with
an understanding of the ‘theological’ to which it is being opposed. Similarly
Barthes’s use of the word ‘truly’ (‘truly revolutionary’) could be said to rein-
state the notions of ‘reason, science, law’ precisely at the moment that he
is claiming to denounce or refuse them. This is not to say that the general
value and significance of his observations can be discounted. Rather it is to
suggest that non-theological thinking is perhaps more difficult than one might
imagine. It is in this respect that we could recall Nietzsche’s supposition that
we shall not get rid of God so long as ‘we still believe in grammar’ (Nietzsche
2003, 48). Like many of Nietzsche’s more disturbing aphoristic remarks, this
assertion borders on the unthinkable: What could one say about anything if
there were no rules governing how to speak or what to say?
Fourth edict: religion is everywhere
It perhaps becomes clearer how deeply Western culture is theologically
embedded if we reflect on the way we structure time. In the most fundamental
way, the year is based on the Christian religion. Every year (1789 or 2010, for192 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
example) is anno Domini, ‘in the year of our Lord’. Things in, say, Europe and
the United States would look very different without a Christian framework:
imagine, to begin with, a concept of the year that does not involve Christmas
or Easter, or a concept of the week that does not have a Sunday. Christianity,
in short, is more pervasive and insidious than many people, including non-
practising Christians, agnostics or indeed atheists, might suppose.
How should we think about this in relation to reading and writing about lit-
erary texts? In many ways, searching for religious and particularly Christian
ideas and motifs in the field of literary studies is like being the Edgar Allan
Poe character in ‘The Purloined Letter’ who is faced with a map and cannot
see the name of the country he is looking at because the letters of the name
are so big. Being critical of religion is also more unusual than one might think.
As Jonathan Culler points out, in an essay entitled ‘Political Criticism: Con-
fronting Religion’: ‘literature departments these days contain people with all
manner of views – Marxists, Lacanians, deconstructionists, feminists – but
seldom anyone who seriously attacks religion’ (Culler 1988b, 78). Culler
goes on to provide a forceful summary of the responsibilities of the teacher
and critic in this context:
The essential step is to take up the relation of our teaching and writing
to religious discourse and to maintain a critical attitude when discussing
religious themes – that is, not to assume that theistic beliefs deserve respect,
any more than we would assume that sexist or racist beliefs deserve respect.
This might involve us in comparing Christianity with other mythologies
when we teach works imbued with religion, or making the sadism and
sexism of religious discourse an explicit object of discussion, as we now
tend to do when teaching works containing overtly racist language. (Culler
1988b, 80)
Culler’s exhortation remains as challenging as ever. Especially since the
early 1990s, and even more markedly in the wake of the events of 11 Sep-
tember 2001 and the commencement of the so-called ‘war on terror’, there
has been a ‘return of the religious’. More than ever before, perhaps, we find
ourselves in the midst of religious conflicts. The US and British response
to ‘September 11’ has entailed, in various ways, a reassertion of Christian
structures, traditions and beliefs: the ‘war on terror’ has been insidiously
enmeshed within an oppositional structure ‘Islam vs. Christianity’. In the
early twenty-first century Western leaders (Bush and Blair in particular) have
appeared catastrophically blind or indifferent to that uncanny logic outlined
by René Girard in an essay on the power-play of Shakespeare’s Hamlet,God 193
namely that opponents become more and more similar the more they perceive
themselves to be different from one another. ‘Retaliation and reprisals are
a form of imitation’ (Girard 1986, 282), as he points out. Moreover, as
‘September 11’ dramatically showed, ‘Islam’ is not merely outside the US:
multi-ethnic Western democracies need to reckon with Islamic as well as
Christian religions at home. One important consequence of this is that, as
Alex Thomson has argued, thinking seriously about contemporary democ-
racy entails ‘tak[ing] seriously the prospect that the future of “the West” might
come from “the East”’ (Thomson 2007, 77).
Fifth edict: literature has an evil streak
Rather than naively assume that literature in its creativity and joie de vivre
is somehow innately good, or innocently claim, as did critics such as Matthew
Arnold (in the nineteenth century) and F.R. Leavis (in the twentieth), that
reading and studying literature in some ‘natural’ way make you a ‘better’ per-
son, we should recognize instead that literary creativity has at least as much
to do with evil as with good. In his influential and characteristically religi-
ous essay ‘The Function of Criticism at the Present Time’ (1864), Matthew
Arnold described literature as ‘the promised land’ that contains ‘the best that
is known and thought in the world’ (Arnold 1964, 34, 33). Very much within
this Christian-spiritualistic critical tradition, F.R. Leavis propounded a the-
ory of literature as the embodiment of ‘our spiritual tradition...the “picked
experience of ages”’ (Leavis and Thompson 1964, 82). Such conceptions
epitomize the sorts of spurious claims traditionally made of what Leo
Bersani has described (and incisively criticized) as ‘the authoritative, even
redemptive virtues of literature’ (Bersani 1990, 1). Indeed, it may be said
that there is something diabolical about the literary. As Elizabeth Bowen
once remarked, the novelist is a kind of fiend: the novelist exposes his (or her)
characters to ‘a relentless daylight in which nothing is hid. No human being,
other than a fiend, would treat his [or her] fellow humans, in daily life, in so
ruthless, uncompromising a manner’ (Bowen 1970, 22). As Georges Bataille
makes clear in his pathbreaking study, Literature and Evil(1953), a collu-
sion between creation, imagination and evil is characteristic of literary works
in general. ‘Literature is not innocent’, writes Bataille: ‘Literature, like the
infringement of moral laws, is dangerous’ (Bataille 1985, x, 25).
We can illustrate this by considering the example of John Milton’s Paradise
Lost(1667). In the following lines from Book I, Milton describes the unset-
tling ability that devils have of being able to change instantaneously from the
size of giants to the size of pygmies or to the size of ‘fairy elves’:194 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
...they but now who seemed
In bigness to surpass Earth’s giant sons
Now less than smallest dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pygmean race
Beyond the Indian mount, or fairy elves,
Whose midnight revels, by a forest side
Or fountain some belated peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while overhead the moon
Sits arbitress, and nearer to the earth
Wheels her pale course: they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocund music charm his car;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. (ll.777–88)
Unfolding the comparison of devils with ‘fairy elves’, these lines have to do
with seduction and uncertainty, the charming power of music (or, by exten-
sion, poetry) – to which even the moon seems drawn – and the rebounding
undecidability of ‘joy and fear’, the moment in which one does not know
what one sees (or dreams one sees). Is one charmed by this vision or not?
Milton leaves the comparison there, on the point of the rebound. And in a
sense the whole of Paradise Lostis inscribed in the moment of this rebound-
ing heart.
The passage from Paradise Lostdemonstrates the workings of a powerful
ambivalence and what we might call an aesthetic tribute to the devilish. This
may help to explain William Blake’s famous remark about Paradise Lost, in
‘The Marriage of Heaven and Hell’ (1790–3), that ‘The reason Milton wrote
in fetters when he wrote of Angels & God, and at liberty when of Devils &
Hell, is because he was a true Poet and of the Devil’s party without knowing it.’
One of the most controversial literary critics of the past fifty years, Harold
Bloom, has elaborated an entire theory of poetry (Bloom 1973) in accordance
with this Blakean insight: for Bloom, Milton’s Satan is the very epitome of the
strong modern (i.e. Miltonic and post-Miltonic) poet. In any case it seems
clear that Milton’s great epic poem, and Blake’s poetry in turn, is profoundly
indebted to a kind of aesthetic of evil. As Bataille shows, evil and the literary
imagination are in cahoots. We could illustrate this quite succinctly in terms of
Shakespeare’s Othello, by supposing that this play were retitled Iago: Iago may
indeed be abominable, but he is clearly the imaginative focus of Shakespeare’s
play, the embodiment of its creativity and dramatic energy. A similar case
could be made for the ways Shakespeare draws us into the interior worlds of
Richard III, or Edmund in King Lear, or the Macbeths. A corresponding
sense of the literary aesthetic of evil is suggested by Henry James when he
offers an explanation of the power of The Turn of the Screw (1898), in hisGod 195
comments on that short but enthralling horror novel in a preface to The Aspern
Papers: ‘Only make the reader’s general vision of evil intense enough’, James
says, ‘...Make him [sic] think the evil, make him think it for himself...’
(James 1986, 343).
Putting our fifth edict in slightly different terms, we could say that literature
tends towards the demonic: it is about entrancement, possession, being
invaded or taken over. The word ‘demonic’ here is deliberately ambiguous: a
demon is ‘an evil spirit’ or ‘devil’, but can also be ‘a friendly spirit or good
genius’ (Chambers). It is in this respect that we might understand Jacques
Derrida’s contention that a love of poetry is inseparable from the experience
of a kind of ‘demon of the heart’, a demon in one’s heart (Derrida 1995b,
288–99). To argue that literature has an evil streak is not to imply a moral
denunciation of literary works any more than it is to provide support for the
liberalist notion that reading literature makes you a better person. At the very
least, reading a literary work (or watching a play) entails an encounter with the
unforeseeable: for better or worse, poems, stories and plays can alter our sense
of the world, our selves. They can shake our thoughts and beliefs and trigger
new ones, previously unentertained. Literary texts can be dangerous. No one
is perhaps more palpably aware of this than the author of The Satanic Verses
(1988) who, following the novel’s publication, notoriously became subject
to a fatwa (a death sentence pronounced by a Muslim judicial authority).
Reading literary texts engages us, in a disturbing but creative and singular way,
in the obligation to ‘think the evil for oneself’. The paradoxically creative
force of evil in literary texts is what makes them in turn the exemplary space
for experiencing the undecidable and for thinking about ethics. Far from
being immoral or even amoral, literature involves us in what Bataille calls a
‘hypermorality’ (Bataille 1985, ix). It confronts us with questions which call
for different kinds of decision-making and critical responsibilities. Is The
Satanic Verses an evil work? Is it any more evil than Paradise Lost, say, or
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein(1818) or Elizabeth Bowen’s The House in Paris
(1935)? To rush to decisions in response to such questions is to turn a blind
eye to the enigmatic powers of the literary and to ignore what could be called
its peculiar ethical imperatives.
Sixth edict: literature is sacred
This would be another side to what is paradoxical about the literary. Salman
Rushdie’s Herbert Read Memorial Lecture, ‘Is Nothing Sacred?’ was given
in his absence by Harold Pinter, at the Institute for Contemporary Arts in
London, on 6 February 1990: Rushdie himself was at that time in enforced196 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
hiding as a result of the fatwaand unable to appear in public for the occasion.
Rushdie’s lecture starts off by stating that nothing is sacred:
nothing is sacred in and of itself....Ideas, texts, even people can be made
sacred – the word is from the Latin sacrare, ‘to set apart as holy’ – but...
the act of making sacred is in truth an event in history. It is the product of the
many and complex pressures of the time in which the act occurs. And
events in history must always be subject to questioning, deconstruction,
even to declaration of their obsolescence. (Rushdie 1990, 3)
But the lecture then moves on to cast doubt on this idea that nothing is sacred.
Rushdie suggests that he may be obliged ‘to set aside as holy the idea of the
absolute freedom of the imagination and alongside it [his] own notions of the
World, the Text and the Good’ (5). He goes on to speculate on the idea that art
can and must offer us something like ‘a secular definition of transcendence’
where transcendence is defined as ‘that flight of the human spirit outside the
confines of its material, physical existence which all of us, secular or religious,
experience on at least a few occasions’ (7). Finally, Rushdie withdraws and
appears to want to retract these earlier claims about art and, in particular,
literature. He declares: ‘now I find myself backing away from the idea of
sacralizing literature with which I flirted at the beginning of this text; I cannot
bear the idea of the writer as secular prophet’ (14).
The shifts in Rushdie’s position, the different kinds of flirtation going on
in this brief text, ‘Is Nothing Sacred?’ are neatly illustrative of the seemingly
paradoxical, contradictory nature of the concept of literature. We may, as read-
ers or students or teachers, be powerfully motivated by a sense of the secular
(and even, to phrase it more provocatively, by a sense that religion has been the
greatest evil in human history, that it is nothing more than what Don Cupitt
calls a ‘hatred machine’ (Cuppit 1997, 98)). But so long as we are concerned
with the question of literature we are concerned with what is sacred. The
murder in 1991 of Hitoshi Igarashi, the Japanese translator of Rushdie’s novel
The Satanic Verses, may allow us to reflect sombrely on the terrible blindness
by which certain people have arrived at the belief that The Satanic Versesis an
evil work, a blasphemous book which cannot or should not be read as fictional
(or in that sense ‘literary’) at all. But it also tragically gestures towards what
may after all be the something that is sacred about literature, namely its
untranslatability. Jacques Derrida has spoken of this, in the context of the
German writer and philosopher Walter Benjamin, as follows:
if there is something untranslatable in literature (and, in a certain way,
literature is the untranslatable), then it is sacred. If there is any literature,God 197
it is sacred; it entails sacralization. This is surely the relation we have to
literature, in spite of all our denegations in this regard. The process of
sacralization is underway whenever one says to oneself in dealing with
a text: Basically, I can’t transpose this text such as it is into another lan-
guage; there is an idiom here; it is a work; all the efforts at translation that I
might make, that it itself calls forth and demands, will remain, in a certain
way and at a given moment, vain or limited. This text, then, is a sacred text.
(Derrida 1985b, 148)
The sacred nature of literature has to do with this logic of untranslatable
singularity. As critics such as Terry Eagleton (1996) have stressed, literary
studies in Britain and the USA, for example, in many ways arose out of the
desire or need to find a substitute for religion. As soon as we set it apart
(sacrare) and recognize the singularity or uniqueness of a work, its demand
that it be translated and its insistence on being untranslatable, we are engaging
with the sacred.
To be, or not to be, that is the question...
Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness,
Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun...
Sexual intercourse began
In nineteen sixty-three...
Further reading
Salman Rushdie’s ‘Is Nothing Sacred?’ (1990) is an accessible and very
stimulating essay on literature and the sacred. Jonathan Culler’s ‘Political
Criticism: Confronting Religion’ (1988b) is clear and provocative, as is the
book on which his discussion is centrally focused, William Empson’s Milton’s
God(1965). On religion and the historical emergence of English Studies in
Britain, see Eagleton 1996. Amardeep Singh’s Literary Secularism: Religion
and Modernity in Twentieth-Century Fiction(2006), explores the continuing,
if oblique, importance of religion in the novelistic practice of ostensibly secular
twentieth-century writers. For a very challenging reading of Nietzsche’s
‘God is dead’, see Heidegger’s ‘The Word of Nietzsche’ (1977). For a collec-
tion of complex but fascinating essays on God and language, religion, law,
philosophy and politics, see Jacques Derrida’s Acts of Religion (Derrida
2002b). For two excellent studies that consider the Bible itself from a literary
critical perspective, see Robert Alter, The Art of Biblical Narrative(1981) and198 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The Art of Biblical Poetry(1985). For a useful collection of texts concerned
with historical perspectives on the question of evil, see Rorty (2001). A help-
ful general survey of theology in relation to the work of various contemporary
theorists and philosophers can be found in Graham Ward (1996). For a few
challenging and thought-provoking books on some of the paradoxes of reli-
gion today, see Don Cupitt, After God(1997), Hent de Vries, Philosophy and
the Turn to Religion(1999), Derrida and Vattimo, eds, Religion(1998), and
John D. Caputo and Gianni Vattimo’s After the Death of God(2007).

22. Ideology
The way you think, what you think – about society, ethics, politics, justice,
about poverty and wealth, about education and the health and welfare
systems, about crime and punishment, about human rights, race, religion and
ethnicity, unemployment and the minimum wage, sexuality and gender, the
environment, the ecosystem and global warming, about war and revolution,
about terrorists and freedom fighters – is a matter of language. You make up
your mind about these and a host of other questions in and through the words
you and others use to describe them. Politicians know this, of course, not least
because the politician’s job is almost exclusively concerned with talking (and
to a lesser extent writing) – in parliament, on TV and radio (if she gets the
chance), on the streets and in election campaigns, in her weekly ‘surgery’,
on the telephone or on weblogs, in newspapers, in committees and other
meetings. The politician’s job is to talk, to manipulate language in order to
influence the way others think about and see the world. Her job is all about
‘ideology’: ideology, the way that people think about their world, is produced
and altered in and through language. Language changes, and even creates the
social and political world in which we live. Ideology in that sense islanguage.
Some readers might even feel that our decision to speak of the politician here
as female is itself an instance of ideology – for example, as ‘politically correct’
language. To have called her a ‘him’ could likewise, of course, be called
‘ideological’.
We could illustrate some of these issues through a brief consideration of a
few of the political slogans that have washed over us in the last 75 years or so –
since radio, TV and more recently the Internet have established themselves
as the dominant ways by which political communication happens, and since
politicians have developed the knack of producing phrases (political slogans200 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
or ‘sound bites’) that can be extracted, quoted and re-quoted, in and out
of context, in order to sum up a policy, a political position, a world view. The
following snippets of language may be said to have influenced people’s men-
talities, their ‘ideology’, and consequently their social, political and economic
world: ‘the only thing we have to fear is fear itself’ (Franklin D. Roosevelt,
1933); ‘We will fight on the beaches’ (Winston Churchill, 1940); people have
‘never had it so good’ (Harold Macmillan, 1957); ‘ask not what your country
can do for you; ask what you can do for your country’ (John F. Kennedy,
1961); the ‘white heat’ of the technological revolution (Harold Wilson, 1963);
‘I have a dream’ (Martin Luther King, 1963); get the government ‘off the
backs of the people’ (Ronald Reagan, 1981); there is ‘no such thing’ as society
(Margaret Thatcher, 1987); ‘back to basics’ (John Major, 1993); ‘tough on
crime, tough on the causes of crime’ (Tony Blair, 1992); the ‘war on terror’
(George W. Bush, 2001); ‘change we can believe in’ (Barack Obama, 2008).
In fact, of course, political slogans or sound bites are nothing new: pre-TV
and radio, the US presidential candidate Abraham Lincoln, for example, used
a memorable metaphor from cowboy culture to influence the way people
voted: ‘Don’t swap horses in the middle of the stream’ (1864). And the US
constitution is itself partly founded on the series of sound bites making up
Benjamin Franklin’s preamble to the Declaration of Independence of 1776:
‘We hold these truths to be self-evident...all men are created equal...
certain unalienable Rights...Life, Liberty and the pursuit of happiness’.
But the growth of democracy and of the propagation and dissemination of
ideas through new communication technologies in recent years has signific-
antly increased the importance and power of the isolated sound bite.
What do these isolated pieces of language have to do with literature? And
what can they tell us about the relationship between literature and ideology?
The literary critic and theorist Paul de Man suggests one answer in a statement
that has itself become a sound bite, in his 1982 essay ‘The Resistance to
Theory’: ‘What we call ideology is precisely the confusion of linguistic with
natural reality’ (de Man 1986, 11). What de Man seems to be alluding to is
the way that, for example, by designating the man with a gun and a balaclava
as a ‘terrorist’ you understand his actions in one way and thereby ‘confuse’ that
naming with the ‘reality’ of his actions and purpose; but by naming him a ‘free-
dom fighter’, you understand him differently, and ‘confuse’ your phrase with
another sense of his ‘reality’. ‘Ideology’ has to do with the attempt to establish
one of these ways of talking about the man in the balaclava as the dominant
discourse, as the ‘hegemony’. De Man’s remark places literature, the art of
language, at the centre of political or ‘ideological’ debate: as de Man himself
asserts, it means that, ‘more than any other mode of inquiry’, literary criticismIdeology 201
and theory (what de Man calls ‘the linguistics of literariness’) is itself ‘a
powerful and indispensable tool in the unmasking of ideological aberrations’
(de Man 1986, 11).
The word ‘ideology’ has something of a bad name: the ‘crude’ Marxist
notion of ideology is of ‘false consciousness’, ‘the system of ideas and rep-
resentations which dominate the mind of a man [sic] or a social group’
(Althusser 1977, 149), as contrasted with the underlying reality of economic
and class relations. The influential theorist Louis Althusser summarizes
Marx’s notion of ideology by contrasting it with ‘the concrete history of
concrete material individuals’: ideology, instead, is a ‘pure dream’, it is ‘empty
and vain’ and ‘an imaginary assemblage’. ‘Ideology’, Althusser continues,
‘represents the imaginary relationship of individuals to their real conditions
of existence’ (Althusser 1977, 151, 153). In classical Marxism – which, as
we shall see, Althusser radically develops – ideology is an imagined represen-
tation of reality: it is false, distorted by definition. Ideology is not, Terry
Eagleton remarks, ‘a set of doctrines’: rather, it ‘signifies the way men [sic] live
out their roles in class-society, the values, ideas and images which tie them by
their social functions and so prevent them from a true knowledge of society as
a whole’ (Eagleton 1976, 16–17).
From a poststructuralist perspective, the notion of ideology is fun-
damentally suspect, since it relies on a questionable opposition of true and
false, of reality and false consciousness. By this view, ideology appears too
easily as a master term for totalizing readings of literary texts. In this chapter,
however, we shall attempt to suggest ways in which the work of the neo-
Marxist critic Louis Althusser has effectively produced a poststructuralist
Marxism by substantially modifying the ‘crude’ opposition of disguised or
distorted representations on the one hand and an underlying political and
material reality on the other.
In a famous essay entitled ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses’
(1969), Louis Althusser seeks to describe ways in which the state exerts its
power outside such institutions as the army, the courts, the police, etc. – that
is to say, in culture and society generally. The central insight of this essay is
that ideology is bound up with the constitution of the subject, that ‘man is
an ideological animal by nature’ – meaning that people constitute or define
themselves ashumansthrough ideology. Althusser argues that
the category of the subject is constitutive of all ideology, but at the same
time...the category of the subject is only constitutive of all ideology
insofar as all ideology has the function (which defines it) of ‘constituting’
concrete individuals as subjects. (Althusser 1977, 160)202 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
To put it simply: subjects – people – make their own ideology at the same time
as ideology makes them subjects. The implications of this idea are enormous
because it means that ‘ideology’ goes to the heart of personal identity, of how
we conceive ourselves as subjects in the world and all that this involves.
Althusser avoids a reductive opposition of ideology and reality by suggest-
ing that ideology makesour reality in constituting us as subjects. Ideology,
Althusser argues, ‘hails or interpellates concrete individuals as concrete sub-
jects’ (162): it calls us or calls to us as subjects and we recognize ourselves as
subjects in our response to this call. To become human, to identify oneself as
a subject, then, is an effect of ideology. For Althusser, the function of Art gen-
erally is, as he remarks in ‘A Letter on Art’, ‘to make us see’, and what it allows
us to see, what it forces us to see, is ‘the ideology from which it is born’
(Althusser 1977, 204). What is most terrifying and compelling about this is
the fact that being a subject feels so real, so natural – and yet, as Althusser
remarks, this very ‘reality’ or ‘naturalness’ of being a subject is itself an
‘ideological effect’.
This is heady stuff, and rather abstract – if also, as Althusser suggests,
terribly real. How can we begin to think about the workings of ideology in
literary texts? Etienne Balibar and Pierre Macherey take us some way towards
an understanding of the question in their important essay ‘On Literature
as an Ideological Form’ (1981). They argue that literary texts produce the
illusion of ‘unity’. Such writing is, for them, itself ideological. For Balibar
and Macherey a ‘material analysis’ needs to look for ‘signs of contradic-
tions’ which appear ‘as unevenly resolved conflicts in the text’ (87). For these
critics, indeed, literature begins with ‘the imaginary solution of implacable
ideological contradictions’: literature is there because ‘such a solution is
impossible’ (88). In capitalist society, literature itself is an ‘ideological form’,
both produced by and producing ideology. The task of the critic would be to
look beyond the unity that the literary text strives to present, and forcefully to
explore the contradictions embedded within it. The strange case of detective
fiction illustrates this point very well. The genre produces its own consoling
fictions, its own ideology. While we may think of crime as eternally recurring,
for example, as an unavoidable function of any sociopolitical context, detect-
ive fiction allows us to perceive it as both solvable and the result of the actions
of specific, isolated and morally culpable individuals.
The cultural theorist Tony Bennett has argued that a thoroughgoing
Althusserian criticism would not simply restore or reveal the contradictions
that are already in texts: rather, it would ‘read contradictions into the text’ in
such a way that it would ‘effect a work of transformation on those forms of
signification which are said to be ideological’ (Bennett 1979, 146–7). In thisIdeology 203
respect, an ‘ideological criticism’ is not one that understands the reality of
a text better. Rather it is criticism that changes the text. Such a reading of,
say, an Agatha Christie detective novel would not simply seek to expose ways
in which such writing conforms to and reinforces the status quo of bourgeois
capitalism. Instead, it would recognize reading as an intervention in and trans-
formation of that text itself. Bennett argues that there can be no notion of ‘the
text’ underlying any reading: texts have ‘historically specific functions and
effects’ (Bennett 1979, 148), they change in time, and what changes them is
reading.
In order to think about some of these points and questions, we shall briefly
consider Edgar Allan Poe’s story ‘The Purloined Letter’ (1845). This story,
and Poe’s earlier ‘The Murders in the Rue Morgue’ (1841) and ‘The Mystery
of Marie Roget’ (1842–3), are often considered to be the first examples of
modern detective fiction. Set in Paris, the narrative concerns a detective named
Auguste C. Dupin, who is asked to solve a mystery concerning the theft of a let-
ter from the ‘royal apartments’ belonging to ‘a personage of the most exalted
station’ (495), that is to say, presumably, the Queen of France. The contents of
the letter have the potential to compromise the Queen and leave her open to
blackmail. As she is reading the letter she is interrupted by her husband, from
whom the letter must be concealed. She does not have time to hide the letter so
she lays it on the table as she talks to her husband, relying on the fact that it is
notconcealed to hide the fact that it mustbe concealed. While they are talking,
another person, ‘Minister D.’, enters the room, notices the letter and manages
to exchange it for a worthless letter that he happens to be holding. The Queen
sees this exchange but can do nothing to stop it without drawing attention to
the secret letter. She is now open to blackmail and her letter must be discreetly
retrieved by the head of the police service. The police have surreptitiously
searched Minister D.’s house but have been unable to find the letter. Dupin is
asked to help. He goes to the minister’s house and manages to spot the letter,
turned inside out, but revealed for all to see, hanging from the minister’s
mantelpiece. Later, by returning to the house with a copy of the letter and
arranging for the minister to be distracted while he is there, Dupin manages
to substitute his copy for the genuine article and retrieve the now doubly
purloined letter.
Detective fiction may be understood to have a conservative ideological
form because of its generic investment in the restoration of the status quo.
A detective story typically involves a disturbance of order in the wake of
an originary event of physical violence or theft of property, followed by the
re-establishment of order by the discovery of the criminal – after which the
jewels are returned or the murderer is punished (or both). Moreover, the genre204 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
conventionally relies on the idea of the criminal as an autonomous individual:
he or she must be morally responsible for his or her actions and must not be
insane (or at least be sane enough to be morally culpable). This is because
the genre depends, on the one hand, on an outcome in which society’s and the
reader’s desire for moral restitution is fulfilled and, on the other hand, on the
detective’s ability rationally to deduce the criminal’s motives. If the criminal
is mad, he or she cannot be punished (he or she must be cured), and his or
her motives and actions cannot be rationally deduced because they will be, by
definition, irrational. Similarly, any critique of society or social institutions
is likely to be counterproductive in a work of detective fiction because of the
danger that ‘society’, rather than a particular individual, will itself come to
be seen as the culprit. This is a dilemma which is particularly acute in, for
example, contemporary feminist detective fiction: the novels of such writers as
Sara Paretsky, Amanda Cross and Gillian Slovo are concerned as much with
exposing the gross injustices of patriarchal society as with finding a specific
criminal. In such cases there is a sense in which the criminal cannot finally be
punished and the status quo restored because it is that very status quo which
is responsible for the crime. Encoded within classic detective fiction, then,
is a reactionary political agenda. This ideological form of the genre might
be said to be an unspoken but necessary part of any conventional detective
story. From this point of view, one could say that ‘The Purloined Letter’
involves the re-establishment of power relations, the assertion of the culprit as
autonomous and independent, and the implementation of reason to restore
the status quo.
But what is particularly interesting about Poe’s story from this perspective
is not so much the way in which it institutes and reinforces the ideological for-
mation of a certain literary genre, as it is the fact that this formation also entails
a number of paradoxes, sites of disturbance and displacement. One of the key
elements of the story is the identification of the detective with the criminal.
Dupin explains that he was able to discover the letter by identifying himself
with Minister D. and, in particular, by identifying the minister’s mode of
thinking as both rational and poetic (like Dupin, he is both mathematician and
poet). The story establishes what we might call ‘inspired reasoning’ – as con-
trasted with the rational approach of the regular police – as the characteristic
technique for both detective and criminal in detective fiction. But the story
also initiates a central paradox of the genre whereby the detective not only
identifies with but is in some ways identical to the criminal. In this sense, it is
no accident that the letter is, in fact, ‘purloined’ twice – once by the minister
and once by Dupin. The detective in this story, and in detective fiction more
generally, must obey the double bind of identity with, but difference from, theIdeology 205
criminal. This intrinsic generic paradox suggests ways in which the ideolog-
ical conservativism of the genre, its investment in a restoration of the status
quo and reinforcement of an absolute distinction between criminal and non-
criminal, may be undermined. Similarly, in establishing ‘inspired reasoning’
as the modus operandi for both detective and criminal, Poe’s story opens the
way for its own deconstruction. While detective and criminal, author and
reader all need to employ reason to attain their ends, such reason is continu-
ally disturbed by its ‘other’, inspiration or unreason. It comes as no surprise,
therefore, that Poe was also obsessed with occultism, spiritualism and the
uncanny. Nor is it any surprise to discover that the inventor of Sherlock
Holmes, Arthur Conan Doyle, was on the one hand a trained physician and,
on the other, a keen amateur in the study of telepathy and the afterlife. The
detective in this context combines a doctor’s empirical and scientific acumen
with a telepath’s ability to read the criminal’s mind. More generally, detective
fiction seems to be continually threatened with its generic other – the gothic,
tales of psychic phenomena, spiritualism – as is suggested by such gothic
tales as Doyle’s The Hound of the Baskervilles(1902), for example, or such
apparently supernatural tales as his ‘The Parasite’ (1893). Finally, the genre
of detective fiction is organized through a precarious relation with social
critique. As we have pointed out, classic detective fiction must distance itself
from an ideological critique of society which, however, can never be finally
erased. Detective fiction can only exist if there are crimes to detect, and if
there are crimes to detect society cannot be perfect. Some of the most interest-
ing exponents of detective fiction – Dashiel Hammett, Raymond Chandler,
Elmore Leonard, or more recently Paul Auster, William McIlvanney, Sara
Paretsky, Philip Kerr, Walter Mosley, Ian Rankin, Henning Mankell – gain
much of their narrative energy from precisely such a tension – the possibility
that the constitution of their narratives as detective fiction will be dissolved by
their unavoidable engagement in social and political critique.
Our final point concerning Poe’s story and its relation to ideology concerns
the way in which it is based on the idea that what is most open or revealed,
most ‘obvious’, may itself be the most deceptive or most concealing. The fact
that Minister D. conceals the purloined letter precisely by nothiding it, by
leaving it where all can see it (the place where no one – except Dupin – will
look, because it is too exposed), makes ‘The Purloined Letter’ an allegory of
ideological formation. Ideology may be defined in terms of the obvious,
in terms of common sense. It is, in the West, ‘common sense’ that a ‘normal’
subject or person is autonomous, for example, that crime is the result of
individual actions, or that such an individual operates through rational
motivation. But at the same time each of these obvious, self-evident or206 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
commonsensical points disguises a very specific concept of the self, an
ideology.
Rather than offering an escape from ideology, then, literary texts may be
considered as places where the structures and fractures of ideology are both
produced and reproduced. Literary texts do not simply or passively ‘express’
or reflect the ideology of their particular time and place. Rather, they are sites
of conflict and difference, places where values and preconceptions, beliefs
and prejudices, knowledge and social structures are represented and, in the
process, opened to transformation.
Further reading
A good brief account of ideology is the entry in Williams, Keywords(1976).
More recent, more detailed and exhaustive is Terry Eagleton’s The Ideology of
the Aesthetic(1990). Good short introductions to the subject include Terry
Eagleton, Ideology: An Introduction(1991), David Hawkes, Ideology(1996),
James Decker, Ideology (2004), and Michael Freeden, Ideology (2003). For
useful collections of essays, see Eagleton, ed., Ideology(1994) and Mulhern,
ed., Contemporary Marxist Literary Criticism(1992). Althusser’s ‘Ideology
and the Ideological State Apparatuses’ (1977) is a basic text for a considera-
tion of the fundamental importance of ideology in the constitution of the
human subject. The classic Althusserian account of literature is Macherey’s
astute and highly readable A Theory of Literary Production (1978); see
also Balibar and Macherey, ‘On Literature as an Ideological Form’ (1981). For
a more up-to-date account, drawing on numerous Althusser texts posthu-
mously published in French, see Warren Montag, Louis Althusser (2003).
A valuable work on the ideology of detective fiction in particular is Stephen
Knight’s Form and Ideology in Detective Fiction (1980); for a more recent
study of the genre, see John Scaggs’s Crime Fiction (2005). Poe’s ‘The
Purloined Letter’ has itself become a site of intense ideological conflict and
theoretical speculation following important essays by Lacan and Derrida: see
Muller and Richardson, eds, The Purloined Poe(1988).

23. Desire
In 1954 Alan Turing, the inventor of one of the first modern electronic
computers (the ‘Turing Machine’), killed himself. Two years earlier, he had
been prosecuted for ‘gross indecency’ – that is, for having sex with another
man. His crime had been to desire the wrong person, to have the wrong
desire. The man who, with others, has transformed our world by the manipu-
lation of a binary system (on/off), was prosecuted and persecuted thanks to
another binary system – right/wrong, good/evil, moral/immoral, legal/illegal,
heterosexual/homosexual, normal/perverse. There is a terrible irony here.
Turing’s machine and its descendants exploit a simple polarity to develop
the most complex patterns imaginable (and those beyond imagination).
Society’s programme of ethics and legality, by contrast, can often seem to be
based on rigid and unforgiving binary oppositions. Desire: right or wrong.
Is it possible that desire is more complex? The most influential philo-
sopher of desire in the twentieth century has been Sigmund Freud. For
Freud, all desire goes back to the child’s original desire for the mother, for the
mother’s breast. This desire is so strong that it produces an absolute iden-
tification: ‘“I am the breast”,’ wrote Freud, ventriloquizing the unspoken
words of the infant (Freud 1975b, 299). Beyond this originary desire, how-
ever, Freud tends to see the precise structure of desire as determined by social-
ization, by the way in which the child is brought up. In such texts as On
Sexuality: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality(1905/1977), Freud argues
that desire is ‘essentially’ mobile – it has no essence, no proper object, beyond
the child’s hallucinatory desire for the breast. Most justifications for the pro-
scription of desire – against homosexual acts, for example – rely on assertions
about what is ‘natural’. But if we accept Freud’s arguments, we find that the
appeal to the natural is highly questionable.208 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The mobility of desire is demonstrated by a text such as Shakespeare’s
comedy Twelfth Night(c. 1601). While his Romeo and Juliet(c. 1595) may
seem to reproduce the myth of an absolute and eternal love between one man
and one woman, Twelfth Night is concerned rather with the contingency
and mobility of desire. Duke Orsino sees himself as a true lover, a man
overwhelmed by love and constant only in his desire:
For such as I am, all true lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is belov’d. (II, iv, 17–20)
In love with an image of the woman he claims to love, Orsino is at the same time
in love with the image of himself in love. A philosopher of love – most of his
speeches meditate, often absurdly, on the nature of love and the lover – Orsino
is unaware that ‘true love’, including his own, is ultimately love of love, that
desire is desire for its own image. In spite of himself, Orsino illustrates the
accuracy of Nietzsche’s aphorism: ‘In the end one loves one’s desire and not
what is desired’ (Nietzsche 1989, 93). In fact, by the end of the play it has
become clear that Orsino’s desire is radically mobile and contingent. Orsino
uses his servant Cesario as a messenger between himself and Lady Olivia, the
woman he desires. Cesario is really a woman called Viola, dressed as a man,
and is herself in love with the Duke. At the end of the play, Olivia marries
Viola’s twin brother and Viola reveals that she is really a woman. At this point,
unabashed by the ease with which his desire can move from one object to
another, Orsino proposes marriage to Viola. The ‘true lover’ in Shakespeare’s
play turns out to have mobile and vicarious desires, and even gender seems to
be more a comedy of convention than a matter of nature. Does Orsino finally
desire Viola or Cesario?
In the context of literature more generally, we can begin to think about the
importance of desire in two fundamental ways. In the first place, we would
suggest that every literary text is in some way aboutdesire. To say this, how-
ever, is not to suggest that it is everywhere and always the same desire. As
Michel Foucault’s influential three-volume The History of Sexuality(1976–84)
makes particularly clear, desire is bound up with all sorts of social and institu-
tional practices and discourses – with questions of law, gender and sexuality,
with the discourses of medicine, theology, economics and so on. Thinking
about desire in literary texts – about representations of desire – inevitably
opens on to questions of historical context. For example, nowadays we may
take for granted the term ‘homosexual’ and the notion of homosexual desire.Desire 209
But as we show in more detail in Chapter 24, below, the term and indeed the
concept is relatively recent. The first entry for ‘homosexual’ in the OED is
from 1892. Critics such as Joseph Bristow have demonstrated that a critical
appreciation of a play such as Oscar Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest
(1895) is crucially dependent on an understanding of the historical emer-
gence of a homosexual lifestyle at the end of the nineteenth century (Bristow
1992a). While the term ‘homosexual’ can refer to both men and women, its
entry into the English language in the late nineteenth century did not result in
a sudden visibility for lesbians, however. Indeed, the most striking aspect of
lesbianism in ‘straight’ culture generally has been the denial of its existence.
There’s a well-known story that in 1885 Queen Victoria reacted to the sug-
gestion that there should be a law for women corresponding to the new law
against ‘gross indecency’ between men by remarking that ‘no woman could
ever do that’ (quoted in Castle 1992, 128). The story is probably apocryphal,
but it does register something important about the historical denial of sex
between women. A similar denial is recorded in Leonard Woolf’s mother’s
response to Radclyffe Hall’s lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness (1928):
‘I am seventy-six – but until I read this book I did not know that such things
went on at all. I do not think they do’ (quoted in Knopp 1992, 118). And, in
literary criticism, it is only since the 1980s, despite pioneering studies such as
Jeannette Foster’s Sex Variant Women in Literaturefrom 1958, that a critical
vocabulary for talking about lesbian writing has begun to emerge. As far as
‘straight’ culture goes, critics such as Joseph Allan Boone, for example, have
shown how the very form of conventional nineteenth-century narrative is
bound up with the Victorian social dynamics of courtship and marriage
(Boone 1987). According to Boone, the traditional marriage plot ‘owes much
of its idealizing appeal to its manipulation of form to evoke an illusion of order
and resolution’: this ‘illusory’ sense of order, he suggests, itself ‘glosses over
the contradictions, the inequalities, concealed in the institution of marriage’
(Boone 1987, 9).
But literary texts are not only about how and why characters desire each
other and what happens to those desires. Literary texts also produce or solicit
desire. They make us desire, in reading. Literary texts, we might say, are (in
Deleuze and Guattari’s phrase) ‘machines of desire’. Not only do they gener-
ate desire (such as the desire to read on), but they are generated by it (by the
desire, for example, to tell). In this respect it might be useful to turn Freud’s
famous question of female desire, ‘what does a woman want?’ (quoted in Jones
1953–7, 2: 468) – and Gayatri Spivak’s reformulation of it as ‘what does a man
want?’ – into a question about literary texts: What does a text want? Does it
want to tell us something or conceal something? Does it want to make us want210 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
it? How? And so on. But if texts can be thought to desire, readers desire, too:
we desire solutions, we desire to get to the end of the story, we desire insight or
wisdom, pleasure or sadness, laughter or anger. The fundamental paradox of
reading, however, is that we always desire an end (a resolution, an explanation,
the triumph of good), but that this end is not the end of desire. As Boone has
shown, classic nineteenth-century narratives tend to end with the apparent
satisfaction of desire (the reader’s, the character’s or preferably both). But as
Freud has taught us, this end of desire is not the end of the story: as he specu-
lates in ‘Civilization and Its Discontents’, there is something in the very nature
of sexual life which ‘denies us full satisfaction’ (Freud 1985e, 295).
Perhaps the most important post-Freudian theorist of desire, especially in
the context of literary studies, is the French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan. His
particular concern is with what he terms the ‘paradoxical, deviant, erratic,
eccentric, even scandalous character’ of desire (Lacan 1977a, 286, quoted
in Bowie 1991, 134). Lacan’s texts are notoriously difficult to read, in part
because they claim to (or are condemned to) speak on behalf of this strange
figure of desire. Any attempt to summarize or explain what he has to say about
desire is bound to be misguided – precisely to the extent that it will appear to
be putting this scandalous figure in a conceptual straitjacket. With that pro-
viso in mind, however, we could be a bit scandalous in our own fashion and
summarize Lacan’s characterization of desire as follows: Lacan elaborates on
Freud’s contention that there is something about the nature of desire that is
incompatible with satisfaction. His account of desire is more radical than
Freud’s, however. Freud emphasizes the ways in which we can never get what
we want: we may think we have got it (downloading a new tune to our iPod, pay-
ing for a new car), but actually desire will always have moved on again (to the
next tune to download, to the chance to get on the road and drive and so on).
This, after all, is how capitalism works, what it desires – or needs, indeed – in
order to function at all. Waiting for a final fulfilment of desire is like waiting for
Godot in Samuel Beckett’s play. For Freud, this endlessly deferred complete
satisfaction is seen simply as an unavoidable, if rather poignant aspect of what
it is to be human. For Lacan, on the other hand, the nature of desire is at once
more alien and more subversive. This can be illustrated in two ways. First, for
Lacan, the alien or alienating character of desire is not something that happens
to come along and make life difficult for people. Instead, people have become
alienated before they even become people (or ‘subjects’ in psychoanalytic
terms). The human subject is always already ‘split’ – divided within itself by
the scandalous nature of desire. Second, Lacan gives much greater emphasis
than Freud to the role of language in relation to desire. One of Lacan’s most
famous dicta is that ‘the unconscious is structured like a language’ (see, for
example, Lacan 1977a). For Lacan, language is not something that we can useDesire 211
in order to try to make ourselves more comfortable with the alien nature of
desire: desire speaks through language and it speaks us. We are, in a way, the
senseless puppets of desire as much when we speak or write as when we fall
in love.
The interdependence of desire and language in turn is an overt concern
of many literary texts. In such texts, there is a recognition that language or
meaning can never finally be closed or completed and that desire can never
be fulfilled. Robert Browning’s poem ‘Two in the Campagna’, from 1855, is
one such text:
1
I wonder do you feel today
As I have felt since, hand in hand,
We sat down on the grass, to stray
In spirit better through the land,
5 This morn of Rome and May?
2
For me, I touched a thought, I know,
Has tantalized me many times,
(Like turns of thread the spiders throw
Mocking across our path) for rhymes
10 To catch at and let go.
3
Help me to hold it! First it left
The yellowing fennel, run to seed
There, branching from the brickwork’s cleft,
Some old tomb’s ruin: yonder weed
15 Took up the floating weft,
4
Where one small orange cup amassed
Five beetles,—blind and green they grope
Among the honey-meal: and last,
Everywhere on the grassy slope
20 I traced it. Hold it fast!
5
The champaign with its endless fleece
Of feathery grasses everywhere!
Silence and passion, joy and peace,
An everlasting wash of air—
25 Rome’s ghost since her decease.
6
Such life here, through such lengths of hours,
Such miracles performed in play,212 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Such primal naked forms of flowers,
Such letting nature have her way
30 While heaven looks from its towers!
7
How say you? Let us, O my dove,
Let us be unashamed of soul,
As earth lies bare to heaven above!
How is it under our control
35 To love or not to love?
8
I would that you were all to me,
You that are just so much, no more.
Nor yours nor mine, nor slave nor free!
Where does the fault lie? What the core
40 O’ the wound, since wound must be?
9
I would I could adopt your will,
See with your eyes, and set my heart
Beating by yours, and drink my fill
At your soul’s springs,—your part my part
45 In life, for good and ill.
10
No. I yearn upward, touch you close,
Then stand away. I kiss your cheek,
Catch your soul’s warmth,—I pluck the rose
And love it more than tongue can speak—
50 Then the good minute goes.
11
Already how am I so far
Out of that minute? Must I go
Still like the thistle-ball, no bar,
Onward, whenever light winds blow,
55 Fixed by no friendly star?
12
Just when I seemed about to learn!
Where is the thread now? Off again!
The old trick! Only I discern—
Infinite passion, and the pain
60 Of finite hearts that yearn.
The poem is about the impossibility of capturing the moment of desire, of
capturing or ‘holding’ desire, of fulfilling and so ending it. The speaker desires
the ‘good minute’ – analogous to what James Joyce later calls ‘epiphany’ andDesire 213
Virginia Woolf ‘moments of being’ – but recognizes its inevitable escape. The
second stanza makes it clear that this is also a poem about language, about the
tantalizing nature of a moment which poetry attempts to but cannot capture.
In stanza 10, the speaker ‘pluck[s] the rose / And love[s] it more than tongue
can speak’; but the moment passes immediately and he asks ‘Already how am
I so far / Out of that minute?’ Exploring the central trope of romantic love – the
loss of identity in a merging with the other, the desire evoked in stanza nine in
particular – Browning’s poem suggests the impossibility and inevitable failure
of this desire. The poem traces the paradoxes of romantic love while discern-
ing the impossibility of expressing in language the flux of life, the fluidity and
fragility of experience.
If literature and theory alike demonstrate that desire is mobile, endlessly
displaced, they also suggest that it is ‘mediated’, produced through imitation
and simulation. Particularly influential in this context has been the recent
work of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick. Developing the ideas of the French post-
structuralist critic René Girard, Sedgwick has argued that desire is every-
where mediated, that desire is structured by a triangular relation of rivalry.
Take three people: A, B and C. A, let us say, desires B. Why? Normally, we
would assume that A desires B because B is desirable (at least to A). For Girard
and Sedgwick, however, things are rather different. For them, A desires B
because B is desired by C. We learn to desire, Girard and Sedgwick argue, by
copying others’ desires, and our desire is produced, fundamentally, in
response to the desire of another. ‘The great novelists’, Girard claims, ‘reveal
the imitative nature of desire’ and expose what he terms ‘the lie of spontaneous
desire’ (Girard 1965, 14, 16). Now, Sedgwick further points out that most of
the examples in Girard’s book, Deceit, Desire, and the Novel(1965), involve a
specific relation of gender, wherein B is a woman and A and C men: the woman
is the object of desire, while the two men are rivals. Love stories often concern
the rivalry of two men for a woman, in which the rivalry itself indeed becomes
more important than the desire for the woman. For Sedgwick, in fact, Western
culture in general is structured by a ‘crisis of homo/heterosexual definition’:
‘an understanding of virtually any aspect of modern Western culture must be,
not merely incomplete, but damaged in its central substance to the degree that
it does not incorporate a critical analysis of modern homo/heterosexual
definition’ (Sedgwick 1991, 1). She develops these insights to suggest that,
in Western discourse, in stories, novels, films and so on, relationships are
most commonly structured in terms of what she calls ‘homosocial desire’.
Homosocial desire is not the same as homosexual desire. It does not need to
be explicitly expressed as desire, and it is not necessarily physical. In fact,
homosocial desire is often concerned rigorously to exclude the possibility of214 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
homosexual relations. The traditional male preserves of locker room, board-
room and clubroom are sites of homosocial bonding which, at the same time,
may be virulently homophobic. But in a male-dominated society, such rela-
tions are fundamental: in all such societies, Sedgwick claims, ‘there is a special
relationship between male homosocial (includinghomosexual) desire and the
structures for maintaining and transmitting patriarchal power’ (Sedgwick
1985, 25). Sedgwick argues that a large proportion of the stories, films, songs
and other narratives by which Western society imaginatively structures desire
can be read as narratives of homosocial desire: while such narratives take as
their overt subject the desire of a man for a woman, again and again the really
important relationship is that between two men, either as rivals or as col-
leagues, friends, or associates. Developing the idea first proposed by the
French structuralist anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss that in many soci-
eties women tend to be tokens of exchange, Sedgwick argues that women are
effaced in this triangular structure, as mere objects for barter. At some level,
then, patriarchal society excludes women even from relations of desire.
Homosocial desire in our society, Sedgwick suggests, is both the most
required and the most carefully regimented desire.
Sedgwick offers a highly provocative model for thinking about desire in
narrative. According to this model, the workings of desire are inextricably
linked to the homophobic, homosocial and patriarchal structures of society.
Many canonical works of literature might be reread in these terms. This is not
to suggest that the Great Tradition is full of closet homosexuality, for example,
just waiting to be ‘outed’ (although we make some suggestions in this regard in
our ‘Queer’ chapter, below). Rather, it is to suggest that homosocial desire
in all its forms is central to the workings of what we might like to think of
simply as ‘heterosexual’ writing. The notions of heterosexual and homo-
sexual need to be rethought. Shakespeare’s Hamlet(c. 1601), for example,
concerns not only the murder of Hamlet’s father and its revenge, but also
a relation of rivalry between Prince Hamlet (as a surrogate for his father,
King Hamlet) and Hamlet’s uncle, Claudius (the dead King’s brother), over
the Queen. Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights (1847) may gain much of
its power from the barely hidden conflicts of homosocial desire between
Heathcliff and other men, resulting in rivalry and extraordinary violence. In its
focus on the triangle of two men (Eugene Wrayburn and Bradley Headstone)
and one woman (Lizzie Hexam), Charles Dickens’s Our Mutual Friend
(1865) is a superb, if disturbing, example of the potentially murderous erotic
dynamic that exists between men. Thomas Hardy’s Tess of the D’Urbevilles
(1891), a novel that appears to focus on the eponymous and tragic heroine,
is also structured by rivalry between two men who desire her, Angel ClareDesire 215
and Alec D’Urbeville. D.H. Lawrence’s Women in Love(1921), while overtly
about two men and their love for two women, is also, and perhaps more import-
antly, about the relationship between the two men, Gerald and Birkin.
Desire, then, is both a fundamental topic of literary texts and fundamental
to reading. But one of the things that literary texts consistently suggest is
that desire is paradoxical, mobile, mediated. And perhaps the homophobia
that may have ultimately resulted in the death of Alan Turing can itself be
understood in terms of a distortion or displacement of desire – a fear of
homosexuality, a fear of the other, which is bound up in society’s anxieties
about such mobilities and mediations. One of the responsibilities of con-
temporary literary criticism and theory lies in the exposure, questioning and
transformation of the rigid oppositions that result in such fear and oppression.
Further reading
Foucault’s The History of Sexuality: An Introduction (1981) is a crucial
starting point for thinking about desire. Similarly influential is Deleuze and
Guattari’s difficult but compelling Anti-Oedipus(1983). Peter Brooks offers
fascinating accounts of the reader’s desire in Reading for the Plot(1984) and
Body Work(1993), while Catherine Belsey presents a readable poststructural-
ist account of a number of literary texts of desire in her Desire: LoveStories
in Western Culture (1994). William Irvine’s On Desire (2005) presents a
philosopher’s wide-ranging meditation on the question of desire. Leo Bersani’s
A Future for Astyanax: Character and Desire in Literature(1976) remains a
brilliant and thought-provoking point of reference for exploring the represen-
tation and effects of desire in literary texts. For three excellent brief accounts of
the work of Lacan, see the introductory books by Bowie (1991), Weber (1992)
and Rabaté (2001). On the discourse of homosexual desire and homophobia,
see Jonathan Dollimore’s influential book Sexual Dissidence(1991), and for a
collection of essays on lesbian criticism and theory, see Munt, ed., New
Lesbian Criticism(1992). On the importance of heterosexual desire for the
development of the novel in the nineteenth century, see Joseph Allen Boone,
Tradition and Counter Tradition(1987). For historically wide-ranging dis-
cussions of issues of desire, see Dollimore’s Death, Desire and Loss in Western
Culture(1998) and Sex, Literature and Censorship(2001).

24. Queer
Queer’s a queer word.
The entry of the word ‘queer’ into the English language is itself
a study in the queer ways of words. Chambers Dictionarydefines the adjective
as follows: ‘odd, singular, quaint: open to suspicion: counterfeit: slightly mad:
having a sensation of coming sickness: sick, ill (dialect): homosexual (slang)’.
What’s queer about this synonymatic definition is the way in which it includes
three apparently unrelated senses for the ‘same’ word – clustering around
ideas of strangeness, sickness and homosexuality. One question immediately
arises: how do you get from ‘queer’ as ‘singular’ or ‘quaint’ or ‘slightly mad’
or ‘ill’ to ‘queer’ as ‘homosexual’? While the answer may to some seem to be
self-evident, the process is worth examining in greater detail. The Oxford
English Dictionaryshows the slippage from one sense to the other in action:
its extensive historical account of the word reveals that in fact there was a delay
of more than four hundred years between the introduction of the ‘odd’ or
‘singular’ sense of the word into English and the introduction of its ‘homo-
sexual’ sense. The first entry for ‘queer’ in the OED comes from the early
sixteenth century (Dunbar’s ‘Heir cumis awin quir Clerk’, from 1508), while
the first entry for the word in its homosexual sense is from 1922 in a pub-
lication by the Children’s Bureau of the US Department of Labor. The latter
comes from the straight (but also rather queer) language of a report entitled
The Practical Value of the Scientific Study of Juvenile Delinquents, which
refers to the idea that ‘A young man, easily ascertainable to be unusually fine in
other characteristics, is probably “queer” in sex tendency’. The sentence,
immortalized as an entry in the OEDsimply by virtue of its priority as the first
recorded usage of the word, is intriguing for a number of reasons. It makes
stereotypical assumptions about certain ‘characteristics’, it expresses theQueer 217
idea that queerness is written on the body and implicitly identifies it
with delinquency or illness. But it also holds the word at arm’s length – with
so-called ‘scare-quotes’ – as if the term is not fully accepted or acceptable,
or as if the word is still in process, moving from a sense of oddness to a
(related) sense of homosexuality. Homosexuality is ‘queer’, then, because
of the perceived queerness of queers, their difference from ‘us’ (scientists, US
Department of Labor officials, sociologists, and so on): queers are a category
apart, a self-defining and identifiable group determined precisely by the queer
difference of its members from the regime of the normal – from what Adrienne
Rich, the contemporary lesbian poet and critic, calls ‘compulsory hetero-
sexuality’ (Rich 1986).
But the story of ‘queer’ is not over yet. For the next 70 years or so,
‘queer’ gained currency in the English language in the United States and
elsewhere as (usually) a derogatory term for (usually male) homosexual; it was
combined with ‘coot’ to form the dismissive phrase ‘queer as a coot’; and, in
the 1960s and 1970s, was combined with ‘bashing’ to denote (and doubtless
to help legitimize) verbal and physical violence against those who were, or
who were perceived to be, homosexual. In the late 1980s and early 1990s,
however, partly in response to the spread of AIDS among gay men, the word
took a queer turn: homosexuals themselves began to ‘reclaim’ the word, to use
it in place of the gender-specific and arguably effete term ‘gay’ or the clinical
and cheerless ‘homosexual’ or the polite and even mythological-sounding
‘lesbian’. ‘Queer’ becomes a term of pride and celebratory self-assertion, of
difference affirmed and affirmative difference. The very reason for the use
of ‘queer’ to denote homosexuality in the first place – the sense that homo-
sexuality is associated with singularity and difference – is also inherited in this
act of linguistic reappropriation, but the values afforded such strangeness are
reversed. The fact that queers are different from ‘straight’ people is seen as a
source of power and pride – and ‘straight’ now becomes a term with poten-
tially negative connotations (conventional, dull, unadventurous). ‘Queer’ also
has the advantage of being an inclusive term which gains in prestige and power
just in so much as it shakes up our codes and codings of male and female,
or masculinity and femininity, or bi-, hetero- and homo-. As Eve Kosofsky
Sedgwick comments, ‘queer’ can refer to ‘the open mesh of possibilities,
gaps, overlaps, dissonances and resonances, lapses and excesses of meaning
when the constituent elements of anyone’s gender, of anyone’s sexuality aren’t
made (or can’t be made) to signify monolithically’ (Sedgwick 1994, 8).
Essentially, then, ‘queer’ challenges all gender and sexual essentialisms.
In homage to this brilliant queering of ‘queer’, its (re)appropriation as a
device for the social and political empowerment of certain more or less218 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
defined, more or less discrete, more or less oppressed sexual identities, and
linking up with our comments elsewhere on the association of literary texts
with the uncanny or the strange, we would like to suggest that literature is itself
a little (and sometimes more than a little) queer. By this we mean two things.
Firstly, we want to suggest that there is an eminent tradition of queer writing in
English, writing by men and women who are more or less permanently, more
or less openly, more or less explicitly, queer and writing about queerness. For
reasons that will become clear, this tradition is all but invisible before the late
nineteenth century, although it arguably includes Marlowe, Shakespeare, the
debauchee Lord Rochester, the eighteenth-century poet Katherine Philips,
Henry Mackenzie (author of the novel of exquisite sensitivity The Man of
Feeling [1771]), Matthew Lewis (author of the Gothic high-camp novel
The Monk [1796]), Lord Byron, Walt Whitman and Herman Melville. But
the literary canon from the late nineteenth century onwards is full of authors
who are queer, who write homoerotic poetry or write about the experience of
homosexual desire – including Gerard Manley Hopkins, Algernon Swinburne,
Oscar Wilde, A.E. Housman, Virginia Woolf, Vita Sackville-West, Djuna
Barnes, D.H. Lawrence, Dorothy Richardson, Charlotte Mew, H.D., Katherine
Mansfield, Rosamund Lehmann, Radclyffe Hall, T.E. Lawrence, E.M.
Forster, Elizabeth Bowen, W.H. Auden, Christopher Isherwood, Compton
Mackenzie, Tennessee Williams, Allen Ginsberg, Gore Vidal, Truman
Capote, James Baldwin, Patrick White, William Burroughs, Edmund White,
Thom Gunn, Adrienne Rich, Joe Orton, Alice Walker, Jeanette Winterson,
John Ashbery, Hanif Kureishi, Alan Hollinghurst and innumerable others.
We might say that there is a canon of queer writers in modern literature, except
that the ‘straight’ canon is itself everywhere inhabited by queers (many of the
writers listed above, that is to say, are central to the canon of literature in
English, whether they are read as queer or straight).
Our second reason for talking about literature as ‘a little (and sometimes
more than a little) queer’ is to suggest that literary texts in general might be
open to what has been called ‘queer reading’. Some of the strangeness or
uncanniness, some of the power and fascination of literary texts, that is to say,
has to do with the singular space which they offer for thinking (differently)
about gender and sexuality. This point is illustrated by the work of Eve
Sedgwick, one of the most influential queer theorists of recent years, whose
notion of ‘homosocial desire’ we discuss, above, in our chapter on ‘Desire’. In
an essay entitled ‘The Beast in the Closet’ (first published in 1986), Sedgwick
discusses Henry James’s short story ‘The Beast in the Jungle’ (1903). James’s
story is an apparently ‘straight’ story about John Marcher, a confirmedQueer 219
bachelor, who has a terrible and overwhelming secret (the ‘beast’ of the title),
a secret which never is, never could be, articulated, but which is nevertheless
understood by his friend May Bartram, a woman who supports him and who,
it is clear, could – or should – have been his lover or wife. In a stunning reading
of the story, Sedgwick examines a number of aspects of the story and its dis-
cursive contexts. She discusses the figure of the bachelor in the late nineteenth
century, for example, as a role that allowed certain men to avoid the rigorous
demands of the compulsorily heterosexual society in which they lived. (James
himself, Sedgwick argues, was a bachelor whose complex sexuality seems to
have been notable as much for the obstinacy of its heterosexuality as for any-
thing else.) Sedgwick considers the dynamics of ‘male homosexual panic’ as
the unmanageable fear of homosexuality among heterosexuals, a fear that
would also appear to be based on the heterosexual male’s fear of his own
desire for other men. Sedgwick then examines certain linguistic and rhetorical
aspects of the apparently heterosexual story and shows how, viewed in this
light, the story turns queer. Thus Sedgwick notes that the story uses the word
‘queer’ on a number of occasions to denote John Marcher’s condition: while it
is clear that the primary sense of the word denotes a certain ‘strangeness’ (after
all, the homosexual sense of ‘queer’ was not an explicit part of its official
meaning in 1903), nevertheless, as we have seen, the move within ‘queer’ from
‘strange’ to ‘homosexual’ is never far away – and is not as queer as it might
seem. In this respect, James’s use of the word may be seen to be haunted by
its semantic developments a few years later and to raise the spectre of an
unacknowledged difficulty concerning Marcher’s sexual identity. Sedgwick
also notes a number of less specific ‘lexical pointers’, all of which are ‘highly
equivocal’ but which add up to a queering of the whole story. Phrases such
as Marcher’s ‘singularity’, ‘the thing [May Bartram] knew, which grew to be
at last...never mentioned between them save as “the real truth” about
him’, ‘his queer consciousness’, ‘dreadful things...I couldn’t name’, ‘his
unhappy perversion’, and so on (quoted in Sedgwick 1994, 203), convey a
strong sense of specifically sexual disturbance in Marcher’s character. In a
complex and enthralling piece of literary critical detective-work, Sedgwick
develops a reading of the text which compellingly suggests the ‘cataclysm’
of Marcher’s condition to be that of (in Oscar Wilde’s poignant formulation)
the ‘love that dare not speak its name’, the unacknowledged and unacknow-
ledgeable homosexuality of his queerness. As far as the normative values
of straight society are concerned, queerness is devastatingly and catastro-
phically queer: the ‘straight’ Marcher’s problem is his inability to deal with
the problem of (his) queerness.220 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
In her reading of the story, however, Sedgwick is not attempting to argue,
definitively, that Marcher (or James, for that matter) is in any simple sense
homosexual. Instead, she is queering the narrative by thinking through its lin-
guistic and conceptual slippages and their engagements with the discourse
that emerges out of and indeed energizes the otherwise bland, monolithic cer-
tainties of heterosexuality. Sedgwick attempts to bring out (from the closet,
so to speak) the extent to which the discourse of homosexuality – the hetero-
sexual discourse of homosexuality, that is to say, the way that homosexuality
is conceived and expressed by so-called ‘heterosexuals’ – may be read in a text
that is apparently concerned with very different matters. And Sedgwick’s
reading powerfully demonstrates that the discourse of heterosexuality is
itself dependent upon that of homosexuality, governed, even defined, by that
which it excludes. There is something rather queer, in other words, about
being straight.
As well as opening up new ways of reading ‘straight’ literary texts, then,
queer theory – such as recent work by Michel Foucault, Eve Sedgwick, Judith
Butler, Leo Bersani, Alan Sinfield, Jonathan Dollimore, Joseph Bristow and
others – has begun to challenge our ideas about gender and sexuality by query-
ing (or queerying) the very basis of the categories we use to talk about our-
selves, us queers and us straights. Queer theory, that is to say, queers the pitch
as far as sexuality is concerned. As a number of theorists have commented,
there is something rather curious, rather queer, about the way in which we
divide our human and social worlds into two supposedly discrete (if not
always discreet) categories. Of all the possible categories that are available
to us to define ourselves and others – our wealth (or lack of it), class, height,
hair colour, dietary preferences, shoe size, baldness or otherwise, political or
religious beliefs, aesthetic preferences, choice of holiday destination or MP3
player – the one that our culture has fixed upon to define us most profoundly,
in some respects perhaps even beyond that of ethnic origin, race or skin
colour, is that of sexual preference, the sex of the person whom we desire. This
is the case not least because, as Leo Bersani remarks, ‘Unlike racism, homo-
phobia is entirely a response to an internal possibility’ (Bersani 1995, 27).
In his history of homosexuality, David Halperin observes that ‘it is not
immediately evident that differences in sexual preference are by their very
nature more revealing about the temperament of individual human beings,
more significant determinants of personal identity, than, for example, differ-
ences in dietary preference’ (Halperin 1990, 26). The comment invites us
to imagine a world, or a society, in which one’s identity would be defined
by one’s choice of food, a world in which, say, vegetarians would regularly be
discriminated against in terms of their careers (they would not be allowedQueer 221
to join the army, for example, for fear that they might seduce others into
vegetarianism); would be subject to physical and verbal abuse while walking
quietly in the streets of our cities (veggie-bashing, it would be called, and
would be caused by veggiephobia, the fear of being forced to eat carrots or
green beans or even of finding out that one is, deep down, oneself a vegetar-
ian); would be disqualified from adopting children because of the fear that
such children would lack a balanced diet in the crucial early years of their
physical and mental development; would often socialize in special veggie bars
and clubs generally avoided by carnivores; and would be, or would be thought
to be, immediately recognizable by the way they walked and the way they
talked, by their clothes, their hairstyles, and their general demeanour. This
imagined world might remind us of the pervasiveness and power of sexual
preference as a determiner of our everyday lives. Indeed, the absurdity of this
fictional scenario brings home how deeply embedded in our thinking is our
definition of gender and sexual preference. Michel Foucault makes the point
forcefully in an interview when he remarks that ‘ever since Christianity, the
West has not stopped saying: “To know who you are, find out about your sex.”
Sex has always been the focal point where, besides the future of our species,
our “truth” as human subjects is tied up’ (Foucault 1980a, 3). In this context
we might think about how odd it is, how queer, that our social worlds and
our social prejudices are organized around a choice – the sex of our sexual
partners – which in some ways is similar to choices about eating, or not eating,
meat.
One of the major projects of queer theory has been to examine the ways
in which, in fact, the categories of desire by which we regulate our social and
sexual worlds are not as fixed and immutable, not as ‘natural’ and self-evident,
as we might like to think. Indeed, according to the influential argument of
Michel Foucault, our ideas about hetero- and homo-sexuality are a function
of the ‘invention’ of homosexuality in the late nineteenth century. While the
precise historical configurations of any such ‘invention’ have been challenged
by historians of sexuality, many of whom see the late seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries as the crucial period of redefinition and ‘crystallization’ (see
Sedgwick 1985, 83; Glover and Kaplan 2000, 91–3), Foucault’s argument has
been highly important in the development of queer theory. But it is crucial to
understand that when Foucault claims that homosexuality was invented at a
particular time in the recent past he is not arguing that men did not love, desire
and have sex with other men, or women with women, before that time. Rather,
he is suggesting that the apparently unequivocal distinction between being
homosexual or beingstraight – the sense that you areone or the other, and
the sense that who you areis defined by that distinction – is an aspect of sexual222 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
relationships and personal identity which has developed only very recently
within certain institutional and discursive practices. According to Foucault,
during the nineteenth century a series of shifts in the discourses of medicine,
law, religion, politics and social analysis combined to produce the homo-
sexual as a discrete identity. In particular, while medicine began to define
a certain type of behaviour and certain desires as characteristic of a certain
‘type’ of person (the so-called ‘invert’), the law redefined sexual acts between
men as ‘gross indecency’ (an offence instituted in the so-called ‘Labouchère
Amendment’ added to a law passed in the United Kingdom in 1885 which was
primarily concerned with the regulation of prostitution). The new law crimin-
alized sex between men (it simply ignored sex between women), by contrast
with an older law, against ‘sodomy’, which covered certain forms of sex
between men and women as well as various other kinds of ‘unspeakable’
acts, sexual and otherwise. Thus, for example, Jeffrey Weeks points out
that nineteenth-century society imprisoned together atheists, the mute and
sodomites, suggesting a strange homology of criminality (Weeks 1998, 693).
As a result, the homosexual comes to be seen, within certain legal and medical
discourses, as a particular type of person, as having a particular identity. In
an eloquent and forceful passage from The History of Sexuality: An Introduc-
tion, Foucault argues as follows:
As defined by the ancient civil or canonical codes, sodomy was a category
of forbidden acts; their perpetrator was nothing more than the juridical
subject of them. The nineteenth-century homosexual became a personage,
a past, a case history, and a childhood, in addition to being a type of life,
a life form, and a morphology, with an indiscreet anatomy and possibly a
mysterious physiology. Nothing that went into his total composition was
unaffected by his sexuality. It was everywhere present in him: at the root of
all his actions because it was their insidious and indefinitely active prin-
ciple; written immodestly on his face and body because it was a secret that
always gave itself away. It was coinsubstantial with him, less as a habitual sin
than as a singular nature...Homosexuality appeared as one of the forms
of sexuality when it was transposed from the practice of sodomy onto a kind
of interior androgyny, a hermaphrodism of the soul. The sodomite had
been a temporary aberration; the homosexual was now a species. (Foucault
1981, 43)
Foucault is arguing that within ‘the ancient civil or canonical codes’ homo-
sexuality as an identityis more or less invisible before the mid to late nineteenth
century. In other words, in the context of thinking about, say, Shakespeare,
asking the question of whether or not he was homosexual is, in effect, anQueer 223
anachronism, inappropriate to the specific ways in which sexuality and sexual
identity were constructed, experienced and defined in the late sixteenth and
early seventeenth centuries.
The notion of the historically and culturally constructed nature of sexual-
ity, the idea that sexualities are differently defined and differently experi-
enced at different times, is taken one step further by the influential theorist
of gender and sexuality Judith Butler. For Butler, gender and sexuality are
performative, rather than fixed or determined by biology or ‘nature’: gender
identity ‘is performatively constituted by the very “expressions” that are
said to be its results’ (Butler 1990, 25). ‘I’m queer’ is not simply a descriptive
statement but makes something happen: it not only states but affirms and even
creates the identity it refers to. According to this argument, in fact, the more
of a man or the more of a woman you are, the more obviously your masculinity
or femininity is a performative construct, the more overtly it is acted out. Both
gender and sexuality, for Butler, are always kinds of drag acts so that theatrical
drag acts play out the implicit logic of sex and gender identity according
to which our lives are, more generally, determined. As an example of such a
performance of gender and sexuality Butler reminds us of the title of Aretha
Franklin’s hit ‘You Make Me Feel Like a Natural Woman’. Butler remarks
that on first sight the line seems to be affirming the notion of the naturalness of
gender and sexuality: the singer’s love for the man makes her a natural
woman. Butler comments that the line seems to indicate that ‘there is no break-
age, no discontinuity between “sex” as biological facticity and essence, or
between gender and sexuality’ (Butler 1991, 27). But when we think a little
more carefully we see that this naturalness is both something that is learntor
produced(‘you makeme feel...’), and something that is imitated(‘you make
me feel like...’). Playing out and articulating the performative logic of gender
and sexuality, Aretha Franklin is singing about it, wittingly or not, as a kind
of ‘heterosexual drag’ (28). This, for Butler, is indicative of the way that all
sexualities – homo-, hetero-, bi- and other – are forms of drag, performances
of sex and of gender.
‘Shakespeare’, declares Harold Bloom, ‘largely invented us’ (Bloom 1994,
40). One way of understanding this claim would be in relation to the cultural
construction of gender and sexuality. Reading Shakespeare can help us to
think about ways in which sexuality is an unstable site of conflict and trans-
gression, historically contingent, mobile, a performance. Writing at a time
before categories of homo- and heterosexual desire had been institutional-
ized, medicalized, rigidified and policed, Shakespeare’s writing questions
what it means to be a man or a woman, and what it means, as a man and as
a woman, to desire men and to desire women. We might end by thinking224 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
about Shakespeare’s sonnet 20, a key text in debates surrounding his rep-
resentations of sexuality and sexual identity: in this sonnet, as Bruce Smith
comments, ‘for the poet, for his readers, and presumably for the young man’,
issues of love and sexuality ‘reach a crisis’ (Smith 1994, 249). Here is a poem
that has fascinated (and indeed horrified) readers and critics through the
centuries, a poem by a man addressed to a man, his ‘master mistress’, which
thinks about masculinity and femininity and thinks about the different ways
in which they inhabit male and female bodies, thinks about how homo- and
hetero-eroticism are performed, played out in language. It is a poem that both
plays on stereotypes of gender and sexuality (including misogyny) and, at
the same time, disorients them, queers them, plays with the idea of a ‘natural’
gender and sexuality but also with the idea of the constructedness of such
identities. This is a natural wo/man: a man who is all man, by nature ‘pricked
out’, but who is at the same time, curiously, queerly, female, his ‘woman’s face’
by ‘nature’ ‘painted’:
A woman’s face, with nature’s own hand painted,
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion –
A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquainted
With shifting change, as is false women’s fashion;
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
A man in hue all hues in his controlling,
Which steals men’s eyes and women’s souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
But since she pricked thee out for women’s pleasure,
Mine be thy love, and thy love’s use their treasure.
Further reading
Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s books Between Men(1985), The Epistemology of the
Closet(1991) and Tendencies(1994) present inaugural and highly influential
accounts of queer theory and homosocial and homosexual desire, focusing
on a series of (mainly) nineteenth- and twentieth-century texts. The opening
two chapters of the groundbreaking Between Menoffer a good starting point.
Alan Sinfield’s brisk, polemical and entertaining books Cultural Politics –
Queer Reading(1994) and The Wilde Century: Effeminacy, Oscar Wilde and
the Queer Moment (1994) provide good accounts of many of the ideasQueer 225
encountered in this chapter. Both Nikki Sullivan’s A Critical Introduction to
Queer Theory(2001) and Donald E. Hall’s Queer Theories(2003) offer good
short introductions to the field. A more detailed and scholarly discussion
of queer sexuality in Renaissance England is Bruce Smith’s Homosexual
Desire in Shakespeare’s England (1994). For a thought-provoking study
of nineteenth-century US literature in this context, see Scott S. Derrick,
Monumental Anxieties (1997). Correspondingly, for a study of ‘effeminate
England’ since 1885, see Joseph Bristow (1995). For a brilliant and often
excoriating examination of some of the presuppositions and prejudices sur-
rounding cultural representations of homosexuality (including those of
‘queer theorists’ themselves), see Leo Bersani’s Homos(1995). Lee Edelman’s
No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive(2004) presents a powerful and
provocative analysis of queer ethics, political and culture. For an important
recent account of the historicism of queer theory and the history of homo-
sexuality, see Halperin, How to Do the History of Homosexuality (2002).
Noreen Giffney and Myra Hird, ed., Queering the Non/Human(2008), is an
impressive and often thought-provoking collection of essays on everything
from starfish to nanotechnology. The ‘Queer Theory’ page at theory.org.uk
(www.theory.org.uk/ctr-que1.htm) is also a useful resource.

25. Suspense
In a moment, we shall say something that may be rather shocking. In the
meantime, we propose to describe two kinds of suspense, resolved and
unresolved. ‘Resolved’ suspense is usually associated with thrillers, detective
stories, Gothic novels, tales of mystery and the supernatural, and romances.
The Italian novelist and literary theorist Umberto Eco uses the term ‘closed
texts’ for such narratives, as contrasted with ‘open texts’ which leave the
reader in doubt or uncertainty (Eco 1979). In closed texts, the murderer is
found, the mystery resolved, the ghost exposed as a mechanical illusion, or the
lovers are able to consummate their love. In these cases, suspense relies for its
resolution on the revelation of a secret or secrets. Resolved suspense can also
be created by delaying an event that we know will happen. This is especially
clear in examples from cinema. We feel certain that the woman behind the
shower curtain cannot escape the raised dagger of the psycho-killer, but for a
few seemingly endless moments the fulfilment of this expectation is delayed.
Similarly, in Fatal Attraction (1987) the pet rabbit is never going to avoid
the boiling pot, and in Silence of the Lambs(1991) it is only a matter of time
before Hannibal the cannibal lives up to his name and gets his unjust dessert.
Here suspense is not so much created by a hermeneutic gap, by the reader’s
ignorance, as by our expectation of an event which is delayed: we are pretty
sure whatis going to happen, we just don’t know when.These are kinds of
narrative suspense, then, that can be defined in terms of expectation, delay
and resolution.
One of the most notorious instances of literary suspense is Henry James’s
novella The Turn of the Screw(1898).In this story, the reader’s expectation
of an ending is screwed to an excruciating pitch of tension (the story is about
suspense itself, as its title might indicate). The suspense of this haunting storySuspense 227
rests largely on whether it is about actual ghosts and real evil, or is simply
a psychological case-study of a disturbed mind. Critics have tended to argue
for one reading or the other. Recently, however, critics have recognized that
the choice of interpretation – the choice, finally, of which story we think we
are reading – is irresolvable. As Roslyn Jolly comments, ‘critics have become
increasingly aware that the irresolvability of the tale’s ambiguity puts on trial
their own readerly skills and assumptions about meaning in narrative’ (Jolly
1993, 102). Indeed, critics have realized that this uncanny and unsettling
suspense of interpretation is itself part of what makes the story so terrifying:
The Turn of the Screwis suspendedbetween two mutually exclusive readings.
While the tale builds up to an extraordinary pitch of narrative suspense, our
sense of what happens at the end of the story may never finally be resolved.
James manages to exploit a fundamentally ambivalent narrative structure (the
story is told by the governess herself, so there is no one to tell us whether or
not she is mad), and to ‘end’ his story in a kind of opensuspense, a suspense
without end. In particular, James continually provides us with pointers or
markers to a final resolution, with suggestions of ghosts, telepathy and evil on
the one hand, and of madness on the other, making us wait for a final resolu-
tion of ambiguities which never arrives. In Chapter 9, for example, the gov-
erness says of the two children, Miles and Flora, that ‘There were moments
when, by an irresistible impulse, I found myself catching them up and press-
ing them to my heart’ (131). The sentence foreshadows in a suspenseful and
undecidable way the extraordinary ending of the story, where the governess
does, literally, ‘catch’ Miles: ‘I caught him, yes, I held him – it may be imagined
with what a passion’ (198). In both cases, however, the forceof this catching –
how forceful it is, and how conscious or rational, what its intention is – is
suspended. Is the governess protecting Miles or smothering him? We are left,
then, in a state of hermeneutic suspense, of interpretative uncertainty – unable
to know, finally, how to read James’s story. Suspense, in this case, is open.
Critics use various terms to describe suspenseful effects in reading: ambiguity,
ambivalence, equivocality, indeterminacy, undecidability, uncertainty, aporia,
gap, hiatus. All of these words may be applied to the effects of suspense
achieved by James’s story.
In addition to such narrative suspense, effects of suspense can be produced
on a more local and less melodramatic scale by aspects of syntax and versi-
fication, by the very language of the text. James, in fact, is famous for a
peculiarly suspenseful sentence structure which complements the intensity of
narrative suspense in stories such as The Turn of the Screw.The story opens in
the form of a ‘frame narrative’: a group of people get together to tell stories, one
of which is that of the governess. Here is the opening sentence of the story:228 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The story had held us, round the fire, sufficiently breathless, but except the
obvious remark that it was gruesome, as, on Christmas eve in an old house,
a strange tale should essentially be, I remember no comment uttered till
somebody happened to say that it was the only case he had met in which
such a visitation had fallen on a child. (81)
Not only is this sentence about suspense – the suspense of being ‘held’ by
a story, the holding of breath and the withholding of comments – but it is also
syntactically structured by suspense. The final word, ‘child’, is the kernel of
the sentence, its centre, but the word is withheld until the end. Before that, the
sentence develops through multiple subclauses and syntactical digressions.
Henry James’s prose, then, the syntax of his sentences, is highly suspenseful.
The Turn of the Screwturns on suspense – indeed turns, self-reflexively,
on the very idea of ‘turns’. Chapter 9, again, is exemplary. The governess is
reading Henry Fielding’s Ameliaalone at night: ‘I found myself, at the turn of
a page and with his spell all scattered, looking straight up...’ (133). She
leaves her room and walks into the hall, where at ‘the great turn of the staircase’
(134) she sees, for the third time, the ghost of Peter Quint. The chapter ends
with a description of this ghost disappearing into ‘the silence itself’: ‘I
definitely saw it turn, as I might have seen the low wretch to which it had once
belonged turn on receipt of an order’ as it disappears ‘into the darkness in
which the next bend was lost’ (135). The ‘next bend’ may be in the darkness
of the staircase, but it is also the next chapter of the story, the dark bend or turn
of narrative. It is not only the governess, then, who sees or hallucinates a
ghostly presence in the turns: our own reading is suspended on the turns of
the narrative.
Verse also relies on turns. The fact that the word ‘verse’ comes from the
Latin vertere, ‘to turn’, might alert us to the way in which verse is wedded to
the turns of line endings, suspenseful places of ghostly pausation. In addition
to the suspense as we turn from one line to the next, verse produces its own
forms of suspense through the exploitation of the possibilities of rhythm.
Comparatively rudimentary verse-forms, such as those of nursery rhymes and
ballads, for example, are notable for the way in which they generate suspense
through rhythmical repetition, by building into the poetry the expectation of
a repetition. The opening to the traditional Scottish ballad ‘Sir Patrick Spens’
is one such example:
The King sits in Dumferling toune,
Drinking the blude-reid wine:
O whar will I get a guid sailor,
To sail this schip of mine?Suspense 229
Much of the force of this powerfully haunting poem (one that, in many
ways, anticipates such pseudo-medieval ballads as Coleridge’s ‘The Ancient
Mariner’ and Keats’s ‘La Belle Dame sans Merci’) is achieved through the
regularity of its metrical arrangement (the regular four-beat first line and
three-beat second line, which continues throughout the poem). Together with
the regular rhyming of lines two and four of each stanza, the prosody of the
poem adds up – in the expectation and fulfilment of rhythmical suspense – to
one of the most compelling of its pleasures.
Effects of rhythmical suspense are also explored in more intricate ways by
poets such as Thomas Hardy. Hardy’s poetry is notable not least for the wide
range of its verse-forms. ‘Neutral Tones’ (written in 1867, first published in
1898) enacts various effects of suspense through rhythm:
We stood by a pond that winter day,
And the sun was white, as though chidden of God,
And a few leaves lay on the starving sod;
—They had fallen from an ash, and were gray.
5 Your eyes on me were as eyes that rove
Over tedious riddles of years ago;
And some words played between us to and fro
On which lost the more by our love.
The smile on your mouth was the deadest thing
10 Alive enough to have strength to die;
And a grin of bitterness swept thereby
Like an ominous bird a-wing...
Since then, keen lessons that love deceives,
And wrings with wrong, have shaped to me
15 Your face, and the God-curst sun, and a tree,
And a pond edged with grayish leaves.
While not strictly regular, the rhythm of the first three lines of each stanza is
more or less regular, consisting of four sets of one or two weak (or ‘short’) [.]
stresses followed by one strong (or long) one [—]: fe stgd | bbaphd | that
wqn | tcr dry. The final line of each stanza, however, lacks one ‘foot’, having
only three combinations of weak and strong stress: Thtey had fallpe| frotm an
ash, | and wcre gruay. The regularity of the first three lines of each stanza is dis-
appointed. This gives an effect of blankness, of something missing, of incom-
plete suspense. This effect is related to the theme of the poem, its sense of
blank hopelessness: the poem is concerned with something missing, a lack, a
loss, which is inexpressible. This, then, is just one example of the many ways230 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
in which poetry is able to create effects of suspense in rhythm such that the
formof the poem is inseparable from its content.
As we have already suggested, poetry can also exploit line endings for
effects of suspense. The neoclassical poetry of Alexander Pope, for example,
plays on the suspenseful formalities of rhyming couplets. The following lines
from Pope’s poem ‘An Essay on Criticism’ (1711) generate suspense through
rhyme, rhythm and antithesis:
True witis Natureto Advantage drest,
What oft was Thought, but ne’er so well Exprest...
(lines 297–8)
The fact that the whole of Pope’s long poem is in the form of rhyming couplets
means that the first line creates the expectation of a second line which will
end in the rhyme ‘est’. And we are not disappointed. The second line both
develops and explains the first, creating an analogy between thought and
nature on the one hand, and clothing and expression on the other, to define
‘true wit’. Owing to the regularity of the verse-form, the first line creates an
expectation of such an answering line and, although the lines are end-stopped
(they do not continue syntactically from one line to the next), they produce the
expectation of such an answer: the sense of the first line is suspended until its
completion in the next.
Writing almost a century later, William Wordsworth also exploits the
suspenseful effects of verse, in particular of line endings, but does so very
differently. Consider, for example, ‘A Slumber did my Spirit Seal’ (1800):
A slumber did my spirit seal;
I had no human fears:
She seemed a thing that could not feel
The touch of earthly years.
5 No motion has she now, no force;
She neither hears nor sees,
Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course
With rocks and stones and trees.
This poem is usually understood to be about a young girl who has died, and
critics usually relate it to other poems which were written by Wordsworth at
about the same time and which concern a girl named Lucy. The speaker
appears to be lamenting not only the girl’s death, but also his own ignorance,
the fact that he remained unaware that she might die when she was alive.
Unlike Pope’s poem in almost every other respect, Wordsworth’s is similar inSuspense 231
that most of its lines are end-stopped. Crucially, however, line three is run on
or enjambed: there is no punctuation after the word ‘feel’, and the next line is
required for syntactical completion. In fact, the end of this line exploits not
only syntactical but also hermeneutic suspense. After all, it would be possible
to read line three as syntactically complete: ‘She seemed a thing that could
not feel’. But this produces a very different meaning from what we find if we
continue to the next line – ‘She seemed a thing that could not feel / The touch
of earthly years.’ There is a significant difference between not being able to
feel, and not being able to feel ‘the touch of earthly years’. The first possibility
gives us the sense that she – like, apparently, the speaker, in line one – is anaes-
thetized, closed off, to all sensation and all emotion. The second possibility
gives us the sense that this was a young girl who seemed as if she would never
grow old or die. What the poem achieves with this line-break, this turn, is to
generate and hold both meanings in suspense. While the latter is no doubt
the ‘correct’ reading – we cannot simply ignore line four, once we have read
it – the apparent completion offered by line three in isolation remains to
haunt this latter sense.
As with our discussion of Henry James, we find that examples of resolved
or closed suspense can in fact be read as open – as examples of the unresolved.
Wordsworth’s poem prompts a number of suspenseful questions. In the very
opening line of the poem, for example, it is not clear whether ‘my spirit’ sealed
a slumber or a slumber sealed ‘my spirit’: in any case it is very difficult to know
what the three words (‘slumber’, ‘spirit’, ‘seal’), either separately or together,
are referring to. Likewise, while we have assumed that the referent of ‘she’ in
line three is a girl, Lucy, the word can also be understood to refer back to ‘my
spirit’ in line one. There is, in fact, no final way of determining which reading
is ‘correct’. While we may want to choose one reading over the other, we have
no way to justify such a choice: the point is undecidable or equivocal. And the
difference has significant implications for any reading of the poem. In the first
place, while the poem appears to be about the relationship between the
speaker and a girl, the equivocal reference of ‘she’ means that we can no
longer be sure that the object of the speaker’s interest is a person outside of
himself, rather than his own ‘spirit’. As Paul de Man comments in his reading
of this poem in his essay ‘The Rhetoric of Temporality’, ‘Wordsworth is one of
the few poets who can write proleptically about their own death and speak, as
it were, from beyond their own graves. The “she” in the poem is in fact large
enough to encompass Wordsworth as well’ (de Man 1983, 225). Rather differ-
ently, it may be that this equivocal reference suggests something very import-
ant about mourning itself – that in mourning, the object of our grief is neither
simply inside nor simply outside the one who mourns. The suspense of232 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
reference in this context might be connected to another of the themes of the
poem – closure. The speaker talks of his spirit being ‘sealed’, of ‘she’ being
untouchable in the first stanza, and in the second of ‘she’ being without
motion, force or sensory perception, ‘rolled round’ with the earth as if sealed
in a grave. This sense of closure may even be reinforced by the end-stopped
rhymes of each stanza. In all of these ways, the poem is ‘about’ a sense of
closure – being sealed, enclosed, finished, dead. And yet the closure that
the poem so intensively suggests is in dynamic tension with the undecidable
suspense of reference – with, indeed, the poem’s meaning. Far from being
closed, in fact, the poem is undecidably suspended. Once we recognize the
central importance of the tension between what we have called closed and
open suspense in the poem, it becomes available as a means with which to map
many of the poem’s features. In particular, we might recognize that the poem
is suspended by the uncanny gap of time between stanza one and stanza
two, that moment outside the poem when ‘she’ dies, the unspoken, perhaps
unspeakable event of a death which at once haunts and generates the poem.
Wordsworth’s poem thus enacts a drama of suspense, an allegory of closure
andundecidability.
Ambiguity and undecidability have been central to Anglo-American liter-
ary criticism and theory in the twentieth century. One of the most influential
works has been William Empson’s Seven Types of Ambiguity(1930; 3rdedn
1953). In the middle decades of the century, partly as a response to Empson’s
book, the so-called new critics focused on ambiguity as a major concern of
literary texts. More recently, poststructuralist critics have emphasized the
notion of undecidability. The difference between new critical ambiguity
and poststructuralist undecidability, though apparently minimal, is perhaps
fundamental. For the new critics, ambiguity produces a complex but organic
whole, a unity wherein ambiguity brings together disparate elements. For
poststructuralist critics, by contrast, undecidability opens up a gap, a rift
in the text which can never be fully sealed. Undecidability opens the text to
multiple readings, it destabilizes the reader’s sense of the certainty of any
particular reading, and ultimately threatens to undermine the very stability of
any reading position, the very identity of any reader (as Søren Kierkegaard
remarks, ‘the moment of decision is madness’). Suspensions of meaning
bypass the reductive and constricting determination of what is now recog-
nized to be the illusion of a single, final, determined ‘meaning’. To think in
terms of undecidability, however, is not to advocate the equal legitimacy of any
and every interpretation: to acknowledge and explore aporias or suspensions
of meaning involves the responsibilities of the most thoughtful and scrupulous
kinds of reading.Suspense 233
Readers tend to want to resolve suspense: like foreplay, suspense carried on
beyond a certain point seems to be undesirable, indeed intolerable. We want
answers, and we want them soon. And there are all sorts of ways of terminating
suspense, of closing it or resolving it. We can appeal to the notion of authorial
intention and try to argue that Wordsworth ‘meant’ this or that, or we can
appeal to ‘historical evidence’ and try to establish whether Lucy ‘really is’ the
referent of this poem, or in line with the dentistry school of literary criticism
to which we referred in Chapter 2, we can simply argue for a single extractable
molar of meaning for the text. Rather than immediately attempting to resolve
suspense, though, we might think about literary texts as themselves sites of
suspense, places where suspense can occur without being closed off, without
being finished (in this context we might appeal to Jacques Derrida’s idea that
‘There is no literature without a suspendedrelation to meaning and reference’
(Derrida 1992a, 48). We might consider that it is the function of literary texts
to go beyond the trite, the comforting, the easy resolution of suspense, to take
us to imagined places where suspense cannot be resolved, where questions are
more complex and more challenging than can be reduced to a single deter-
mined meaning. In this respect, there are reasons to welcome undecidability,
this challenge to our desire to master the text.
Further reading
For a brilliant exploration of Wordsworth’s line endings, see Christopher
Ricks’s ‘William Wordsworth 1’ (1984). For two fine introductory works on
rhythm and metre, see Derek Attridge’s Poetic Rhythm(1992) and Thomas
Carper and Derek Attridge’s Meter and Meaning (2003). An excellent and
imaginative exploration of prosody in terms of the sounds of English poetry is
John Hollander’s Vision and Resonance(1985). On suspense in the sense of
ambiguity or undecidability, there is, perhaps, no better place to start than
William Empson’s classic Seven Types of Ambiguity (1953), first published
in 1930. On the idea of literature as suspended in relation to meaning and
reference, see the interview with Jacques Derrida in his Acts of Literature
(1992a). A classic argument concerning the ‘undecidability’ of contending
meanings in literary texts is J. Hillis Miller’s ‘The Figure in the Carpet’ (1980).
For a rather different approach, see D.A. Miller, ‘ “Cage aux folles”: Sensation
and Gender in Wilkie Collins’s The Woman inWhite’ (1989), which offers a
fascinating consideration of the physiological effects of suspense fiction on
readers.

26. Racial difference
You might reasonably expect a chapter on racial difference to focus on,
for example, William Faulkner’s great novel of social aspiration and race
prejudice Absalom, Absalom!(1936) or Toni Morrison’s closely related slave
narrative, Beloved(1987), or perhaps one of Salman Rushdie’s narratives of
the Indian diaspora, or Derek Walcott’s poetry of Caribbean multiculturalism.
Our intention here, however, is to argue that questions of race, slavery and
racial violence are everywhere, and that they pervade even the most appar-
ently ‘innocent’ literary works. In this way we will be guided by the provocat-
ive and incisive words of the American poet John Ashbery: ‘Remnants of the
old atrocity subsist, but they are converted into ingenious shifts in scenery, a
sort of “English Garden” effect, to give the required air of naturalness, pathos
and hope’ (Ashbery, Three Poems(1956), cited in Wood 2002, 1).
Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre (1847) is one of the classic nineteenth-
century novels in English. It describes a love affair between the eponymous
heroine, a governess, and her aristocratic master, Rochester. The novel ends
with the marriage of Jane and Rochester after Jane has become both profes-
sionally and economically independent. Jane’s struggle for independence
marks the novel as centrally engaged with the oppression of women in
nineteenth-century England and with the possibility of their liberation from
constricting roles of subservience to their male ‘masters’. Alongside the ques-
tion of gender, however, Jane Eyreraises other questions. These are questions
of racial difference and they will form the focal point of this chapter. Jane and
Rochester are unable to marry because Rochester is already married to Bertha
Mason, a creole woman from the West Indies. This woman, who is mad,
is kept locked up in Rochester’s attic. Occasionally she escapes, and at one
point attempts to set light to Rochester’s bed while he is in it. Finally, in aRacial difference 235
pyromaniacal frenzy, she sets light to the house and dies in the blaze. Her
death leaves the way clear for Jane and Rochester to marry, although not before
Rochester is blinded and crippled as he tries to save Bertha from the fire.
While the novel has long been recognized as an exploration and critique of
the position of women in nineteenth-century society, more recently critics
have begun to see questions of racial and ethnic difference as central to the
novel. The delayed recognition of the importance of these questions is telling.
As in the English literary tradition more generally, such questions have been
marginalized or effaced. They have simply not been seen or have been
ignored. Such an effacement is, in fact, inscribed in the novel itself. Indeed,
representations of race in Jane Eyremay be said to constitute a sort of textual
unconscious: like the repressed contents of the Freudian unconscious, they
repeatedly return in disguised form. In the following passage, for example,
racial and ethnic difference becomes part of the flirtatious courtship ritual of
Jane and Rochester. At one point, Jane, the narrator, sees Rochester smile: ‘I
thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a blissful and fond moment,
bestow on a slave his gold and gems had enriched.’ This image of sultan and
slave then develops into a whole discourse on slavery and racial otherness:
‘I would not exchange this one little English girl for the Grand Turk’s whole
seraglio—gazelle-eyes, houri forms, and all!’
The Eastern allusion bit me again. ‘I’ll not stand you an inch in the stead
of a seraglio’, I said; ‘so don’t consider me an equivalent for one. If you have
a fancy for anything in that line, away with you, sir, to the bazaars of
Stamboul, without delay, and lay out in extensive slave-purchases some
of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satisfactorily here.’
‘And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining for so many tons of
flesh and such an assortment of black eyes?’
‘I’ll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary to preach liberty
to them that are enslaved—your harem inmates amongst the rest. I’ll get
admitted there, and I’ll stir up mutiny; and you, three-tailed bashaw as
you are, sir, shall in a trice find yourself fettered amongst our hands: nor
will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds till you have signed a charter,
the most liberal that despot ever yet conferred.’ (197–8)
Ironically, Jane is to gain her financial independence and her freedom from
what Rochester calls her ‘governessing slavery’ (298) when she inherits a for-
tune derived, we can only assume, from the slave-trade of the West Indies.
Moreover, although she seriously contemplates it, she does not finally leave
England with another man, St John Rivers, who wishes to marry her and take
her with him as a missionary to India. Most importantly, however, this passage236 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
presents us with the intersection of the discourses of sexual desire and racial
otherness. These discourses organize the novel but do so in a way that the
novel itself seems to repress. Both Jane and Rochester figure the racially other
as sexually active and even passionate, while at the same time being available
for purchase, like goods to be bought in a market. By contrast, Jane herself
is repeatedly figured in terms of resisting both her own sexual desires and the
financial temptations of Rochester’s wealth: her sexuality is governed by self-
control and she cannot be bought. The passage also brings together questions
of sexuality and gender, race and economics, through its references to slavery.
Slavery, the buying and selling of the dehumanized and racially other, is cen-
tral to the novel’s plot in that Jane gains her financial and therefore social inde-
pendence after inheriting a fortune made in the Caribbean, where slavery had
been the main source of wealth. Rather differently, the novel repeatedly figures
slavery through metaphors of chains and imprisonment. A few paragraphs
after the above quotation, for example, Rochester expresses a desire to im-
prison Jane when he says that ‘“when once I have fairly seized you, to have
and to hold, I’ll just – figuratively speaking – attach you to a chain like this”
(touching his watch-guard)’ (299). The expression ‘figuratively speaking’
denies but at the same time exposes the structure of gender and race relations
organizing the novel: it exposes the fact that Rochester is notonly speaking
‘figuratively’. Indeed, the phrase marks a textual anxiety concerning the
precise status of slavery in the novel – literal or figurative. And this anxiety
is compounded by the fact that while Rochester is flirtatiously threatening
Jane with enchainment, incarcerated in his attic, imprisoned in chains, is his
wife, the racially other Bertha.
A brief reading of a second passage might clarify some of these issues con-
cerning the novel’s representations of race. The first time that Jane and the
reader see Bertha is a crucial moment. Jane and Rochester are prevented from
marrying by the revelation that he is already married. Rochester tells Jane the
truth and, in order to excuse his attempted bigamy, takes her into the attic to
look at Bertha:
In the deep shade, at the farther end of the room, a figure ran backwards and
forwards. What it was, whether beast or human being, one could not, at first
sight tell: it grovelled, seemingly, on all fours; it snatched and growled like
some strange wild animal: but it was covered with clothing, and a quantity
of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a mane, hid its head and face. (321)
No longer a woman, Bertha is the other of humanity, unrecognizable as
human, a beast with a purely animal physiognomy. Almost invisible, BerthaRacial difference 237
cannot be seen. Invisibility, as this suggests, and as we observe in our reading
of the opening to Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Manin Chapter 10, above, is the
condition of racial otherness. As Henry Louis Gates has commented, ‘The
trope of blackness in Western discourse has signified absence at least since
Plato’ (Gates 1984, 315). In this novel, Bertha cannot and must not be seen.
Despite (or because of) her invisibility as an individual, Bertha embodies
the very idea of difference for Rochester and for the novel itself. Rochester
explicitly contrasts Bertha with Jane: ‘look at the difference! Compare these
clear eyes with the red balls yonder – this face with that mask – this form with
that bulk’ (322). By contrasting the two women, Rochester makes it clear that
Bertha should be understood as the other of Jane. But, as we have observed
elsewhere, otherness is a tricky business. If you say that one thing is the oppo-
site of another, you are at the same time asserting their mutual dependence, in
that it is pointless to contrast two things from different categories. You would
not say that a cricket match is the oppositeof a submarine, for example, if only
because there are no obvious points of comparison. What is being asserted
in Rochester’s comparison, then, is not only difference but also likeness: in
particular, they are both women who are, in different ways, imprisoned,
and both are partners for Rochester. Bertha is what Jane is not but could be.
While it is only opposition that is announced, Jane Eyreis haunted by the
possibility that Bertha is not simply other to but also, in some ways, identical
with Jane.
In these respects, then, Jane Eyrearticulates how racial otherness is con-
stituted – both absolutely other, non-human, bestial, and at the same time
an integral element in what defines racial sameness, in this case Englishness
and, or as, whiteness. And it is this ambiguous status of the other (racial or
otherwise) that makes it so threatening, so disturbing, so dangerous. This
dangerous (racial) other, far from being unusual is, in fact, quite common in
canonical works of English literature. Figures of the racially other – more or
less threatening, more or less destructive – appear as, for example, the Moor in
Shakespeare’s Othello(c.1602), the Jew in The Merchant of Venice(c.1596),
Caliban in The Tempest (1611), Man Friday in Daniel Defoe’s Robinson
Crusoe(1719), some of Lord Byron’s dashing, exotic heroes and anti-heroes,
the Malay in Thomas De Quincey’s Confessions of an English Opium Eater
(1822), Heathcliff in Emily Brontë’s Wuthering Heights (1847), Daniel
Deronda in George Eliot’s novel of that name (1876), and various figures
in the colonial stories and novels of Rudyard Kipling (1865–1936), Joseph
Conrad (1857–1924), E.M. Forster (1879–1970) and Graham Greene
(1904–91), to name only some of the most famous examples. Far from being a
marginal concern of English literature, in fact, racial difference is central.238 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
But the internationalizing of contemporary ‘English’ literature in and as the
literatures of the English-speaking ‘world’ – in the literatures of (for example)
Australia, Canada, the Caribbean, Hong Kong, India, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the USA, the West Indies – has also per-
manently altered our conception of such ‘otherness’. The emphatic multicul-
turalism of the postcolonial canon suggests, indeed, that the racial, linguistic
and cultural ‘other’ may indeed be conceived as the white Anglo-Saxon
writer him- or herself. At the same time, the geopolitical, cultural and racial
heterogeneity of postcolonial discourses itself provokes a questioning of the
apparently stable, established values of canonicity, with its assumptions of
paternity and inheritance, its homogenizing linearity of influence, and its
cultural exclusivity.
We have tried to suggest elsewhere in the present book that many of the
major developments in literary criticism and theory of the past few years have
been associated with what is known as a critique of the subject – with a decon-
struction of the stable, coherent and autonomous ‘self’. This critique investig-
ates the idea that there is nothing essentialabout the nature of any individual
or about the human more generally. It is not for nothing that this critique of
the subject and of essentialism has been mounted. Our brief reading of the
dehumanization of Bertha in Jane Eyre has begun to suggest that Western
humanism necessarily defines itself through terms of race, by constructing a
racial other which then stands in opposition to the humanity of the racially
homogeneous. Such essentializing of race is at once philosophically untenable
and very dangerous. Racism is, before anything else, the delusion of essential-
ism. As Robert Young points out, the invention of modern concepts of‘human
nature’, together with ideas about the universal nature of humanity and the
human mind, occurred during the centuries characterized in the West by
colonization, ‘those particularly violent centuries in the history of the world
now known as the era of Western colonization’ (Young 1990, 121). Critics
such as Frantz Fanon, Edward Said, Gayatri Spivak and Homi Bhabha
have argued that the Western discourse of colonialism is constituted by the
other subject – by alterities of race, colour or ethnic origin. Western notions
of human identity itself as universal or unchanging may be recognized as a
historical construct constituted by the exclusion, marginalization and oppres-
sion of racial others.
The institution of Literary Studies is far from free of the discursive
marginalization of racial and ethnic others. For example, it was long thought
possible for writers and critics to appeal to ‘universal’ values. A notorious
instance of this is a series of comments made by the nineteenth-century politi-
cian, literary critic and historian Thomas Babington Macaulay in his MinuteRacial difference 239
on Law and Education(1835). This minute, presented to the Committee of
Public Instruction for Bengal, was destined to have a decisive influence on the
education of the indigenous population in colonial India. Macaulay argues for
the teaching of English and against the teaching of Arabic and Sanskrit to the
Indian population. His argument relies on assertions concerning the aesthetic
value ofWestern culture:
I have no knowledge of either Sanscrit or Arabic. But I have done what I
could to form a correct estimate of their value. I have read translations of the
most celebrated Arabic and Sanscrit works. I have conversed, both here
and at home, with men distinguished by their proficiency in the Eastern
tongues. I am quite ready to take the oriental learning at the valuation of the
orientalists themselves. I have never found one among them who could
deny that a single shelf of a good European library was worth the whole
native literature of India or Arabia. The intrinsic superiority of the Western
literature is indeed fully admitted by those members of the committee who
support the oriental plan of education....It is, I believe, no exaggeration
to say that all the historical information which has been collected in the
Sanscrit language is less valuable than what may be found in the paltry
abridgements used at preparatory schools in England. In every branch of
physical or moral philosophy, the relative position of the two nations is
nearly the same. (Quoted in Said 1983, 12)
While expressing appalling prejudice, this passage appeals to standards of
objectivity, academic authority and apparently rational statements about
‘intrinsic superiority’. The passage is evidence that, as Frantz Fanon remarks,
for the native, ‘objectivity is always directed against him’ (quoted in Said
1993, 196) – that ‘objectivity’ is ideological. In Macaulay’s statement, such
objectivity is, in fact, blatantly ideological in its dependence on judgements of
aesthetic value. By their very nature, such statements can onlybe culturally,
ethnically and historically specific. To judge the aesthetic standards of one
culture by those of another is self-evidently problematic. Judged by the stan-
dards of Japanese Noh drama, for example, Shakespeare’s plays would be
absurdly verbose, unstylized and generally incompetent. And yet the history
of Western aesthetics is dominated by precisely such notions of the universal-
ity of art.
To end this chapter, we would like to suggest two ways of going beyond
such ways of reading and writing. Implicit in our discussion has been the idea
that there is a connection between the differences of race and of gender. In this
respect, Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman argue that any ‘discussion of
ethnicity is always also by implication a discussion of gender and sexuality’.240 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
The reason for this is, not least, that ‘Women, as the biological “carriers” of the
“race”, occupy a primary and complex role in representations of ethnicity...
and it is women’s exercise of their sexuality which is an often unacknowledged
major concern underlying such representations’ (Williams and Chrisman
1993, 17). In Western literature black women have been doubly effaced. As
novels such as Alice Walker’s The Color Purple(1982) and Toni Morrison’s
The Bluest Eye(1970) make clear, black women are silenced both as black and
as female. But it is precisely this doubled otherness which might help us begin
to move beyond racial essentialism, beyond the repressive politics of identity.
In an attempt to get beyond a constricting notion of identity and of a simple
and reductive notion of otherness, Mae Gwendolyn Henderson has argued
that black women’s writing is ‘interlocutionary, or dialogic’ owing to their
position as ‘not only the “Other” of the Same, but also as the “other” of the
other(s), [which] implies...a relationship of difference and identification
with the “other(s)” ’ (Henderson 1993, 258–9). The value of this analysis is
that it allows us to recognize the plurality of identity, to recognize that any
identity is constituted by a multiplicity of positions and differences. Black
women’s writing, in particular, being marginalized twice over, figuring the
other of the other, reinforces a sense of the polymorphic nature of identity. In
addition, Henry Louis Gates has argued that all black texts are necessarily
‘two toned’, or ‘double-voiced’, that they both engage with white canonical
discourse and, at the same time, express a black consciousness. This, for
Gates, leads to a discourse which is duplicitous, potentially subversive, one
that undermines the universalizing and essentializing tendencies of hege-
monic white discourse: ‘Black people have always been masters of the figura-
tive: saying one thing to mean something quite other has been basic to black
survival in oppressive Western cultures’ (Gates 1984, 6).
Our second suggestion for displacing the monolithic and oppressive
assumptions about racial difference is the possibility of reading otherwise
– the possibility of what Edward Said calls ‘contrapuntal reading’ (Said
1993, 78). A number of critics and theorists have suggested different ways of
reading, guided by an acceptance of multiplicity, a questioning of binary
oppositions and an affirmation of radical otherness. Said suggests that we
might read such texts as Brontë’s Jane Eyreor Jane Austen’s Mansfield Park
‘with an understanding of what is involved when an author shows...that
a colonial sugar plantation is...important to the process of maintaining a
particular style of life in England’ (78). Such a reading, a contrapuntal reading,
two-toned or double-voiced, cannot ignore the economics of slavery through
which Jane Eyre’s liberation as a woman is effected.Racial difference 241
Further reading
Frantz Fanon’s impassioned and politically charged The Wretched of the Earth
(1967) is the classic work on race, nationalism and decolonization. For good
recent discussions of race and culture, see David Marriott, On Black Men
(2000), and Brian Nero, Race(2003). For a valuable and thought-provoking
account of racism in relation to the emergence and functioning of the
modern nation state, see David Theo Goldberg, The Racial State(2002). For
a wide-ranging and polemical study of the links between race and sexuality,
especially in the context of slavery, see Marcus Wood, Slavery, Empathy and
Pornography(2002). Much of the most interesting work on race and ethnicity
in literature has been that associated with studies of postcolonialism: for a
useful handbook that clarifies ideas and issues in the field, see Gina Wisker,
Key Concepts in Postcolonial Literature(2007). Two important collections of
essays are Homi Bhabha, ed., Nation and Narration(1990) and Williams and
Chrisman, eds, Colonial Discourse and Post-Colonial Theory (1993). The
work of Gayatri Spivak, who comes at the subject of race and ethnicity from
a specifically feminist position, has been particularly influential: see her In
Other Worlds(1987). For another collection of poststructuralist essays, see
Henry Louis Gates, ed., ‘Race’, Writing and Difference (1986). Gates’s
The Signifying Monkey(1988) is the most sustained elaboration of his the-
ory of writing and racial difference from the perspective of black writing in
the United States. From a more specifically feminist perspective, see Toni
Morrison’s brief and highly readable Playingin the Dark: Whiteness and the
Literary Imagination (1993). In a British context in particular, see James
Procter’s Dwelling Places: Postwar Black British Writing (2003) and the
useful anthology Writing Black Britain, ed. Procter (2000).

27. The colony
Colonialism, postcolonialism, neocolonialism: three isms that depend
upon the figure of the colony. In the preface to this book we remark that
theory – particularly when it takes the form of isms– can seem intimidating or
simply boring. Deeply desiring to be neither, we also have good theoretical
reasons for feeling wary of isms. As Martin Heidegger put it: ‘Every mere ism
is a misunderstanding and the death ofhistory’ (Heidegger 1967, 60–1). This
assertion draws attention to the ways in which ismsinevitably encourage gen-
eralization, abstractness, a lack of critical clarity and of historical awareness.
But saying this of course does not make ismsgo away. Ismsare convenient, as
well as deadly. Here are three convenient, if deadly, definitions: ‘colonialism’
is ‘the policy or practice of obtaining, or maintaining hold over, colonies, esp
with the purpose of exploiting them’ (Chambers Dictionary); ‘postcolonial-
ism’ is concerned with what ‘occur[s] or exist[s] after the end of colonial rule’
(Shorter OED); ‘neocolonialism’ is concerned with the continuing effectsof
colonialism after the end of colonial rule, and thus with a questioning of the
break implied by the post- of ‘postcolonial’. Much ism-izing energy has been
spent on the distinctions or lack of distinctions between these various terms.
For example, the authors of The Empire Writes Back(1989) argue that the
term ‘postcolonial’ should be seen as covering ‘all the culture affected by
the imperial process from the moment of colonization to the present day’
(Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin 1989, 2). This definition mingles colonialism
and ‘postcoloniality’, and also mixes itself up with the arguably more rigorous
and precise conception of ‘neocolonialism’ as involving ‘the half-hidden nar-
ratives of colonialism’s success in its continuing operations’ (Young 1991b,
3). Rather than engage directly with these various isms, we propose in thisThe colony 243
chapter to try to reflect on them indirectly, by focusing on what is common to
them all (the colony) and by considering a series of related topics: language,
time, point of view, writing, law, justice and drama.
The word ‘colony’ itself is suggestive: in etymological terms a patriarchal
and agricultural metaphor (Latin coloniaa colony, from colonusa husbands-
man, from colereto till), ‘colony’ is, according to Chambers, ‘a name vaguely
applied to a state’s dependencies overseas or abroad...; a body of persons
settled in a foreign country, or forming a separate ethnic, cultural or occupa-
tional group; the settlement so formed; the place they inhabit’. One thing is
already clear from this definition: the colony, and all the ismsit colonizes, has
to do with the colonizing power and effects of language itself, with language
as colonization. There is no concept of the colony in the English language
that does not depend on the colonization of English by Latin – which is also to
say, the colonization of Latin by English. Correspondingly, we might ask,
is US English colonized by British English or is it the other way round?
Colonization here, as always, works in two directions: to colonize is, how-
ever imperceptibly or insidiously, to be colonized. If, as William Burroughs
claimed, language is a virus, this is because it is a colonizer. In particular as
‘dependency overseas or abroad’ or ‘settlement in a foreign country’, a colony
always involves the imposition of a foreign language; and all the colonialist
wars in history (there are perhaps no other) are also wars in and over language.
Finally, however, we may suppose that there is no way of thinking about any
of these matters in one’s own language without being already colonized by
language. Colonization is at the origin: we are always already dependants of
language, colonized by one or more languages.
To be ‘always already’ is to be unsure, among other things, about one’s
sense of time. In this and other respects, the notion of colony has a strange rela-
tion to time. As its etymology indicates, ‘colony’ is fundamentally a spatial
term: originally it has to do with tilling the land. When we think about colonies
we think, first perhaps, of space, of the appropriation and exploitation ofland.
But questions of time are just as important in a (post- or neo-) colonialist con-
text. Indeed, as we indicated a few moments ago, the very terms ‘post-’ and
‘neo-’ are temporal, concerned with what comes after or continues to haunt
the colony. Literary texts offer especially good illustrations of how the colony
deranges and disorders the sense not only of place but also of time. We could
consider this, for example, in relation to Conrad’s Heart of Darkness(1902).
On the one hand, there is a clear and irrefutable historical context for the nar-
rative: it is a novel about the European (especially Belgian and British) colonial
exploitation of Africa (especially the Congo) in the late nineteenth century. On244 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the other hand, however, and at the same time, the novel conveys a particularly
strong sense of this journey to the colonial heart of darkness as a journey into
another time. As Marlow recounts:
Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest beginnings of the
world...The broadening waters flowed through a mob of wooded
islands; you lost your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted
all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought your-
self bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had once known
– somewhere – far away – in another existence perhaps. (48)
Conrad’s novel is both historically specific (it illuminates the barbarity of
European colonialism in Africa) and pervasively dreamlike (at once timeless
and primordial). Jean Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea(1966) also characterizes the
colony as unsettling any ‘homely’ sense of time, in particular by evoking the
strange timelessness of dreaming and trance. For the unnamed Mr Rochester
(the colonizer who is also colonized by his time in the West Indies) the
unnamed Windward Island, where he and Antoinette spend their honey-
moon, is ‘quite unreal and like a dream’ (49). Indeed his colonial experience
as a whole may be described as ‘all...a nightmare’ (76). But the strangeness
works in two directions. Thus England in turn is repeatedly evoked in terms
of the timelessness of a dream for Antoinette (49, 70). Just as Heart of
Darknesstraces a disturbing, circular structure which returns the narrative,
finally, to London as the ‘heart of darkness’, so Rhys’s novel complicates our
sense of time in more general narrative terms. Its disordering of temporality
has to do, above all, with its status as a prequel to Charlotte Brontë’s Jane
Eyre. Post- but also pre-Jane Eyre, it exposes the colonialist dimensions
of the earlier novel before the event.
Finally, we could consider the example of Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall
Apart (1958). Achebe’s novel recounts the rise and fall of a man called
Okonkwo, and tells how Christian white men come to colonize and largely
destroy the culture and identity of the Igbo tribe to which he belongs. Like
Heart of Darknessand Wide Sargasso Sea, Things Fall Apartis temporally
deranged and deranging: it is impelled by Achebe’s own ‘decolonizing’ mis-
sion of seeking to write an alternative version of Conrad’s novel, specifically
from the perspective of the colonized. Yet Achebe’s narrator is obliged to
occupy a sort of double-time – at once from the late nineteenth-century time of
the novel’s action (narrating as if from withinthe Igbo tribe) and from the mid-
twentieth-century time of its telling (narrating from a position outsidethe tribe
and from a considerable distance in time). Achebe’s novel is an extraordinary
meditation on the difficulty of saying when‘things fall apart’, of determiningThe colony 245
when, for example, colonization happens, or when the colonial becomes post-
colonial. This difficulty is marked, above all, in the title of the novel, with its
haunting suspension in the present tense, and in the fact that it is a quotation.
The phrase ‘things fall apart’ is taken from W.B. Yeats’s ‘The Second Coming’
(1919), a poem that is inseparable from Christian mythology and inseparable
in turn from the colonialist context of the First World War and the Irish
Troubles. Achebe’s novel, from its title onwards, is written (however critically
or ironically) in the language of the Christian colonizer.
If from a literary perspective the twentieth century is ‘the age of Kafka’, as
Harold Bloom asserts (Bloom 1994, 448), Kafka’s work is perhaps not the
most obvious to turn to for thinking about issues of the colony. Let us, how-
ever, consider a short story that may help to dislodge this assumption. ‘In the
Penal Colony’ (In der Strafkolonie) was written in October 1914 and first pub-
lished shortly after the First World War, in 1919. It is one of Kafka’s grimmest
and least funny stories. Set in an unnamed penal colony, on an unnamed
island, it focuses on a number of unnamed characters and is told – primarily
from the perspective of an unnamed ‘explorer’ – by an uncannily knowledge-
able or telepathic third-person narrator. The explorer has been invited by the
commandant of the colony to witness the execution of a soldier who has been
‘condemned to death for disobedience and insulting behaviour to a superior’
(140). The story focuses on the gruesome and terrifying machine that is to
bring this execution about, and on the ‘officer’ whose proud, even sacred,
responsibility it is to explain the machine to the explorer and ensure that it
does its work. By a characteristically eerie Kafkaesque twist, the officer ends
up freeing the prisoner and putting himself to death in his place; the story
concludes with the explorer leaving the island on a boat with an unnamed
ferryman.
The interest of Kafka’s narrative in terms of issues of (post- or neo-) colon-
ialism has to do with four related ideas: point of view, writing, law and justice.
First, it dramatizes the problem and importance of ‘point of view’, both in a
narratological and also in a more broadly cultural and political sense. It offers
a basis for thinking about questions such as: From what perspective or point
of view can or should one think about, say, Shakespeare’s Othello (1604),
Austen’s Mansfield Park (1814), Forster’s A Passage to India (1924),
Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children(1981) or indeed any other literary work that
engages with colonial differences? And more broadly, from what point of
view does one make ethical and other judgements about other people, other
societies and cultures? Kafka’s story does this by exploring (a word in our
critical vocabulary that suddenly takes on a new ‘colonizing’ dimension) the
explorer’s dilemma from his own point of view: ‘The explorer thought to246 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
himself: It’s always a ticklish matter to intervene decisively in other people’s
affairs. He was neither a member of the penal colony nor a citizen of the state
to which it belonged’ (151). The explorer is a foreigner, a stranger, but he is
also described as being ‘conditioned by European ways of thought’ (155).
How should the man respond to the seemingly undeniable ‘injustice of the
procedure and the inhumanity of the execution’ (151)? Kafka’s text does not
offer any simple answer to this question, focusing instead on the increasingly
intolerable suspense of withholding judgement. At the same time the story
generates an overwhelming sense of the explorer’s unique position and res-
ponsibility: he is seen as ‘an illustrious foreigner’ (155) in a privileged position
to pass comment and influence events. Indeed, Kafka’s story gives a further,
more incisive inflection to the dilemma. For while there is judgement and
decision within the story (the explorer makes clear his strong disapproval of
the machine and the punishment; the officer in turn makes a firm decision to
free the condemned man and take his place), the reader is left finally with what
is in some respects the most ‘ticklish matter’ of all, namely: who is the narrator
of this story, what point of view does he or she have on everything that goes on
in the text, and what, in the light of this, is our own point of view? As Gilles
Deleuze and Félix Guattari have observed, ‘It is by the power of his non-
critique that Kafka is so dangerous’ (Deleuze and Guattari 1986, 60). ‘In the
Penal Colony’ dramatizes an extraordinary experience of solitude, by posing
the question of point of view as a necessary but radically uncertain experience
of responsibilityfor each and any reader. To read the story is to be colonized
by this dangerous power.
Second, Kafka’s text foregrounds the importance of writing itself, of textu-
ality. One of the continuing controversies within the general area of postcolon-
ialist thinking concerns the theoretical complexity of some of its best-known
practitioners. Thus postcolonialist theory is perceived as being ‘depressingly
difficult’ (Williams and Chrisman 1993, ix), above all on account of its seem-
ingly abstract, unworldly focus on ‘discourse’ and ‘textuality’. Edward Said,
Gayatri Spivak and Homi Bhabha in particular have come to be seen as what
Dennis Walder calls ‘the three police officers of the postcolonial’ (Walder
1998, 4). In his engaging book Post-Colonial Literatures in English, Walder
seeks to evade the long arm of the law while trying to keep his sights trained on
postcolonial literary works themselves. This is a bold but also risky strategy.
As Ania Loomba puts it: ‘Many writings on colonial or postcolonial discourse
may not expressly privilege the textual, but they implicitly do so by interpret-
ing colonial relations through literary texts alone’ (Loomba 1998, 95). As
Kafka’s story suggests, when it comes to thinking about the colony, there is no
getting away from the founding complexity of questions of textuality, from theThe colony 247
uncanny character of writing, from the limits of the readable. For law itself is
inseparable from textuality, writing, inscription. Moreover, Kafka’s story is
also a disturbing account oflaw in terms of different, even mutually unintellig-
ible, incommensurable languages or discourses: different characters speak,
read and fail to understand different languages. The punishment for the con-
demned man in Kafka’s story involves a harrow which inserts innumerable
needles into the prisoner’s body and gradually inscribes in his flesh ‘whatever
commandment [he] has disobeyed’ (144). The officer patiently explains:
‘there are two kinds of needles arranged in multiple patterns. Each long
needle has a short one beside it. The long needle does the writing, and the
short needle sprays a jet of water to wash away the blood and keep the
inscription clear.’ (147)
The words being inscribed in this case are ‘HONOUR THY SUPERIORS!’
(144). For the condemned man the sentence is unreadable, unknown, until it
is literally written on his body, by which time he will be at the point of death,
beyond all sense of honour, beyond any sense at all.
Finally, Kafka’s story provokes the thought that every colony is a penal
colony. Every colony entails the imposition of codes of law,justice and punish-
ment from elsewhere, from back ‘home’ or from a foreign country. This is
indeed a central issue in many colonial or postcolonial novels. Forster’s A
Passage to India, for example, turns on the question of justice and the law,
culminating in the drama of the trial scene and the attempt to have Dr Aziz
found guilty of attempted rape. Likewise in Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea, every-
thing depends on the colonizing power of ‘English law’ (see 5, 11, 69) and
what Christophine calls the ‘damn cold lie’ of that English word, ‘“justice”’
(94). Similarly, we may recall that Heart of Darknessconcludes with Marlow’s
meditation on the idea that Kurtz had ‘wanted only justice’ (111), while
Things Fall Apartends with the self-justificatory cogitations of the District
Commissioner who is to write a mere paragraph about what we as readers have
spent a book experiencing and who has decided, ‘after much thought’, to en-
title his work The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger(148).
‘Be just’: these are the key words of Kafka’s brief and terrifying text, ‘In the
Penal Colony’. The dictum appears, according to the officer, among the papers
of the former commandant of the colony. But the explorer cannot read it:
Now the officer began to spell it, letter by letter, and then read out the
words. ‘“BE JUST!” is what is written there,’ he said, ‘surely you can read
it now.’...[T]he explorer made no remark, yet it was clear that he still
could not decipher it. (161)248 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Issues of law and justice are at the heart of all (post- or neo-) colonial liter-
ature. On the one hand, as ‘In the Penal Colony’ suggests, these issues are
always context-specific; they can, and perhaps must, call for a dangerous
experience of solitude in any and every reader. The reader is judge: Be just!
The reader is put in the impossible position of trying to see from the perspect-
ive of both the explorer and the narrator at the same time and, alone, to judge
accordingly. On the other hand, such texts also remind us of the extent to
which ethical and juridical decisions are determined within a context of
specific national and state identities. Thus Kafka’s text might lead us to think
about the need for a revolution in the very concept of international law, beyond
the boundaries of any state or colony. As Jacques Derrida has proposed in
Spectres of Marx: ‘international law should extend and diversify its field to
include, if at least it is to be consistent with the idea of democracy and of
human rights it proclaims, the worldwideeconomic and social field, beyond
the sovereignty of States’ (Derrida 1994, 84).
In Plato’s philosophical colony, his imagined Republic, mimetic art,
including poetry and drama, is to be excluded. Such art is dangerous because
it ‘waters and fosters’ false feelings (Plato 1961, 832): it embodies the
uncomfortable truth that imitation is formative. This recalls the idea, pro-
posed at the outset of this chapter, that language and colonization are inex-
tricable. To imitate is to be uncertainly colonized andcolonizing. We could
consider this further in relation to the important essay called ‘Of Mimicry
and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial Discourse’, by Homi Bhabha, one
of the ‘police officers’ mentioned earlier. Bhabha demonstrates how post-
Enlightenment English colonialism is dependent on a logic of imitation or
mimicry: the colonized other is obliged to mimic the language, and to vary-
ing degrees to imitate the customs, gestures and even dress of the colonizers.
This mimicry, however, is never pure: mimicry, Bhabha argues, ‘is at once
resemblance and menace’ (Bhabha 1996, 362). There is a fundamental
ambivalence in the act of colonial appropriation: the colonizer at once
desires and fears that the colonized be like him (or, less frequently, her).
Colonial mimicry, in other words, is governed by a logic of what Bhabha
describes as ‘almost the same, but not quite’ (361). In order to succeed,
colonial appropriation must fail. As Angela Smith describes it, in the context
of V.S. Naipaul’s The Mimic Menand Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea: ‘The pres-
ence of the colonial other imitating the white male colonizer disrupts the
authority of the colonizer’s language, and [reveals] an inherent absurdity in
the colonial enterprise’ (Smith 1997, xviii). The appeal and effectiveness of
Homi Bhabha’s argument is that it undermines the ‘authoritative discourse’
(362) of colonialism from within: by imitating this discourse, the colonizedThe colony 249
subject shows it to be different from itself, never at home with its own inner-
most desires.
One of the understated effects of Bhabha’s essay is to suggest how import-
ant the notions of theatre, acting and drama are for thinking about (post- or
neo-) colonialism. Indeed, it encourages us to reflect more broadly on the
extent to which personal identity is based on imitation, is inherently theatrical.
These are hardly new concerns in the context of literature. Work by critics
such as Francis Barker and Peter Hulme (1985) and Paul Brown (1994), for
example, has emphasized how deeply Shakespeare’s The Tempest(1611) is a
play about these issues. A play about strange derangements in the experience
of time as well as place, and pervasively concerned with questions of leg-
itimacy, authority and justice, The Tempestis also profoundly engaged with
the ‘colonial’ paradoxes of language, acting and identity. It is a play not least
about teaching and mimicry. Just as Prospero is Miranda’s ‘schoolmaster’
(I, ii, 172), so she in turn becomes the teacher of Caliban, the ‘slave’ whom
they find when first coming to the island. In a celebrated exchange near the
beginning of the play, she reminds Caliban: ‘I pitied thee, / Took pains to make
thee speak, taught thee each hour / One thing or other’ (I, ii, 355–7). Caliban
retorts: ‘You taught me language; and my profit on ’t / Is, I know how to curse.
The red plague rid you / For learning me your language!’ (I, ii, 365–7). There
are a number of paradoxes in play here. This exchange suggests how thor-
oughly language determines who or what we are or might become: there is no
escape from the colonizing and mimicking power of language as it annexes
one subject (Caliban) after another (Miranda). As the quibble on ‘red’ and
‘rid’ intimates, one cannot be rid of what is read, what is read cannot readily be
unread: language in The Tempestis itself a sort of plague. Caliban’s capacity
to curse, indeed his very capacity to embody any meaning at all, is an effect of
linguistic colonization. Yet his cursing at the same time can only ever be based
on a reflection or mimicking of the colonizers and, no doubt, of their own
‘innermost desires’. Caliban presents Miranda and Prospero with a disturbing
and uncertain mirroring of themselves which nothing in the play can finally
efface. This is evident in the very syntax and versification of Prospero’s final
declaration of recognition regarding Caliban: ‘this thing of darkness I /
Acknowledge mine’ (V, i, 275–6). The inverted syntax and the hesitancy
of the enjambment underscore this ambivalent sense of Prospero as not
merely owning but also, and paradoxically, being‘this thing of darkness’.
As Barker and Hulme have emphasized, The Tempestis, in various para-
doxical and intractable respects, ‘a play imbricated within the discourse of
colonialism’ (204). It is also, as we have tried to make clear, a play about acting,
imitation and mimicry. Finally, we would like to suggest that The Tempestis250 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
also a kind of colony in itself. Indeed in a sense this is just what every dramatic
work is. It establishes itself in a strange time and place of its own, linked to but
distinct from the rest of the world: the dramatic work is a site of derange-
ment, mimicry, power and transformation. As Captain Phillip, the Governor
of New South Wales, observes, in Timberlake Wertenbaker’s Our Country’s
Good(1988): ‘A play is a world in itself, a tiny colony we could almost say’ (Act
2, Scene 2). Engaged in casting a different and complex theatrical light on
that penal colony the British called Australia, Our Country’s Good is also,
like any other dramatic work, strangely resistant to being seen merely as a
representation or part of the world in which it is set. In its very title, like
Shakespeare’s The Tempest or A Midsummer Night’s Dream, it establishes
a peculiar colony, it ‘gives to airy nothing / A local habitation and a name’
(AMidsummer Night’s Dream, V, i, 16–17).
Further reading
For a good introductory book on the literary in particular, see Justin Edwards’s
Postcolonial Literature (2008). On the critical side, Nicholas Harrison’s
Postcolonial Criticism (2003) is original, thought-provoking and extremely
good in its expositions. Much valuable material is available in anthologies
such as Ashcroft, Griffiths and Tiffin, eds, The Post-Colonial Studies Reader
(2nd edn, 2006) and Williams and Chrisman, eds, Colonial Discourse and
Post-Colonial Theory (1993). For two excellent introductory works, see
Ania Loomba’s Colonialism/Postcolonialism (1998) and Robert Young’s
Postcolonialism: A History(2001). Loomba is particularly stimulating for the
emphasis she gives to how far issues of gender and sexuality are implicated in
(post- or neo-) colonialism. Youngprovides more detailed coverage of some of
these issues in his earlier book Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture
and Race(1995). Related to issues of gender and sexuality (and indeed appo-
site in the context of the tacitly homoerotic dimensions of Kafka’s ‘In the Penal
Colony’), increasing critical attention has recently been given to the links
between the colony and queerness. On this, see, for example, Christopher
Lane’s challenging but fascinating The Ruling Passion: British Colonial
Allegory and the Paradox of Homosexual Desire (1995), Yonatan Touval’s
playful and thought-provoking essay on APassage to India, ‘Colonial Queer
Something’ (1997) and the very useful collection Postcolonial Queer, ed. John
C. Hawley (2001). For a couple of important but ‘advanced’ works in the gen-
eral field, see Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak’s A Critique of Postcolonial Reason
(1999) and The Pre-Occupation of Postcolonial Studies, ed. Afzal-Khan and
Seshadri-Crooks (2001). For an excellent general study of deconstructiveThe colony 251
thinking in relation to ‘the colony’, see Michael Syrotinski’s Deconstruction
and the Postcolonial(2007). Finally, Edward Said’s work on (post- and neo-)
colonial issues is both very accessible and highly influential: his most import-
ant books are Orientalism(1978) and Culture and Imperialism(1993).

28. Mutant
We became hominid about five million years ago and ‘human’ in the
sense of homo erectusabout three million years later. Homo sapiens,
though, only developed about 30–40,000 years ago. Why it was that our
genetic cousins, the Neanderthals, died out just a few thousand years after
the arrival of homo sapiens, is one of evolution’s enigmas. ‘Wherever humans
advanced,’ Henry Gee explains, ‘Neanderthals retreated.’ In what he calls
‘a sudden spasm’,
humanity (the winners) acquired all the external trappings we think of
as defining our own tribe. The Neanderthals, in contrast, just pottered
around, doing the same kind of timeless nothing-in-particular they’d done
for 300,000 years, for all the world like an extended episode of Winnie-the-
Pooh (only with real Heffalumps). (Gee 1996, 38)
Just think of it, that could be us: a world of endless honey-pots and Pooh-
sticks, with only Heffalumps and Eeyore’s chronic depression to worry about,
and with just Tigger, Piglet, the god-like Christopher Robin and a few others
for company.
Since humans won out, though, things have tended to be a little more com-
plicated, humans being what they are. But what are human beings? What is it
like to be human? We don’t ask this just because we belong to that species
known as academics. Instead it is an inevitable question for anyone who calls
herself a human being. In this chapter, we want to look at what it means to be
human, but also at what it means to be a mutant or a monster, and to discuss
ways in which literature is bound up with these questions. Literature has had
a crucial role in configuring the nature and limits of the human. Beginning
with Beowulf (c. 1000), English literature is a history of monsters. We couldMutant 253
think, for example, about the extent to which the literary canon is strewn with
dehumanized or otherwise mutated people. Samuel Beckett writes plays that
feature disembodied voices, people that spend their time crawling in mud,
that live in dustbins or that are just mouths. Wallace Stevens is interested
in what he calls the ‘inhuman person’ (in ‘Gigantomachia’), and W.B. Yeats
yearns to be a mechanical bird of hammered gold in ‘Sailing to Byzantium’
(1927). In Women in Love(1921) D.H. Lawrence talks repeatedly about his
characters ‘lapsing out’ (for example Lawrence 1960, 48, 199) and all four of
the main characters voice a ‘grudge against the human being’: for Ursula
in particular, ‘that which the word “human” stood for was despicable and
repugnant’ (275). Thomas Hardy is impelled to set the human dramas of
The Return of the Native(1878) against the inhuman geological timescale of
Egdon Heath, and the passions and betrayals of The Woodlanders (1887)
against grotesquely anthropomorphized woodlands. Wordsworth risks scorn
by recording the apparently dehumanized, crazed babblings of an idiot boy
(in ‘The Idiot Boy’ (1798)), and becomes strangely fixated by the figure of
the leech gatherer, a figure like a ‘huge Stone’ or a ‘Sea-beast’, in ‘Resolution
and Independence’ (written 1802). The seventeenth-century poet George
Herbert wants to be a tree (‘I read, and sigh, and wish I were a tree’: ‘Affliction
I’ (1633)). Shakespeare mixes up humans with fairies in A Midsummer Night’s
Dream (1596), spirits and the misshapen monster Caliban in The Tempest
(1611), and presents us with ‘inhuman’ characters in plays such as Richard III
(1592–3), The Merchant of Venice(1598) and Othello(1604). Western liter-
ature as a whole can seem to bulk up like a vast mutation out of the animal,
vegetable, astral, bestial, petrific, spirit and parahuman transformations that
are recounted in Ovid’s Metamorphoses(1 BC) and Apuleius’s The Golden
Ass(second century AD).
To study literature is necessarily to engage with the mutant. ‘Mutant’, from
the Latin for ‘change’, is essentially bound up with inessentiality, with mut-
ability, and with otherness. Contemporary literature in particular is especially
concerned with variations on the mutant. But what is it about biotechnology
and nanotechnology, about eugenics and genetic engineering, the cyborg
and the robot, about monsters and mutants and their interactions with
people that is at once so compelling and so terrifying? ‘We are all chimeras,’
Donna Haraway portentously declares in her influential feminist ‘Cyborg
Manifesto’ (1985). Twentieth-century humans, she asserts, are ‘theorised
and fabricated hybrids of machine and organism; in short we are cyborgs’
(Haraway 2000, 70). What is this fascination with the human as (also) other,
this yearning to be other, to be unthinking or animal, hybrid or cyborg,
mechanical or mutant, virtual, immutable, stony, inhuman, or dead?254 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
In this chapter we would like to explore the workings of such compulsions
and terrors in the context of literature and other so-called ‘humanities’ sub-
jects, and the fascination that the limits of the human seem to hold for humans.
Literature is, above all, about the human, about what it means to be human,
and therefore about the non-human, about what it might mean not to be
human. Literature allows us to think the limits of the human, even to unthink
our often unthinking attachment to notions of the human and humanity.
Finally, literature itself may be conceived as a monstrous or mutant discourse,
a humanism that is also inhuman, alien. In each of the texts mentioned above,
there seems to be an engagement with the human that is expressed in terms
of a fascination with the inhuman, or with a human becoming non-human,
ahuman, abhuman or parahuman. As our reference to biotechnology, nano-
technology, genetics and so on suggests, there is a peculiarly millennial,
peculiarly topical dimension to these questions. This is perhaps most clearly
evident in cinema, with its devotion to mutant, computerized, cyborg or alien
beings such as the Terminator (a creature recently mutated into the ‘real life’
Governor of California, the ‘Governator’), ET, Blade Runner or Robocop,
those appearing in Star Trek, Star Wars, Close Encounters, Alien, Men in Black
and The Matrix (in all their various mutations), as well as those that have
morphed into familiar figures from countless Frankenstein remakes, vampire
and horror flicks, and gothic comic books or ‘graphic novels’. In all of these
movies, Hollywood plays out a cultural desire for and fear of the parahuman
and non-human, of the ‘invasion of the body snatchers’, the invasion of the
boundaries of the human: each of the films mentioned presents a battle
between the human and the non- or para- or quasi- or post-human. And in
each case, human will and imagination, feeling and compassion, is what
survives. All of these films attempt, in the end, to confirm the idea that we are
each of us unique, sentient and compassionate – that we are ‘human’. Despite
the state-of-the-art special effects, the hyper-modern and futuristic scen-
arios, the avant-garde narratives and the balletic digitized violence, films like
the Matrix series are deeply traditional, deeply concerned with traditional
‘human values’, with humanity.
But the concern with how humans are made, and with what makes them
human rather than mutant or monstrous, is also a preoccupation of contem-
porary literature. Jeffrey Eugenides’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel Middlesex
(2002) is a potent and witty example. As if impelled by an attempt to wipe from
memory the more sinister reverberations of his eugenic name, Eugenides has
produced perhaps the first novel based around Richard Dawkins’s theory of
the ‘selfish gene’ (the idea that it’s genes that survive, not individuals, or as
Eugenides puts it, ‘what humans forget, cells remember’ (Eugenides 2002,Mutant 255
99)). Middlesex tells the story of a genetic mutation – in this case a shared
recessive gene, a mutated gene of the fifth chromosome, in the narrator’s
incestuously married grandparents – which finally results in Calliope’s (or
Cal’s) birth as a hermaphrodite. And the novel is about the genetic, familial,
social and political events that lead up to that monstrous birth and the
personal and familial consequences that grow out of it. While Eugenides’s
novel is impressively informed about the biology of genetic mutation, it is also
concerned with the social monstering of the mutant, with the different ways in
which people respond to those that are different (with rage, desire, disgust,
sympathy, rejection, violence, fascination, surgery).
The fascination with the human and the limits of the human in literature is
a strange outgrowth of what is called humanism. Humanism involves the belief
that human beings have ‘unique capacities and abilities, to be cultivated and
celebrated for their own sake’ (Audi 1999, 397). It entails a resistance to
superstitious or religious conceptions of the human on the one hand, and to
the reduction of the human to animality or the organic, on the other. ‘Man is an
invention of recent date’, Michel Foucault famously opines in The Order of
Discourse; but concomitantly it is a ‘mutation’, he says, that may be ‘nearing its
end’ (Foucault 1970, 386–7). The development of modern humanism, of the
idea of ‘man’ as the ultimate value and as autonomous, individual, self-willing
and self-moving, is argued (by Foucault and others) to have occurred between
about the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries. As we have seen (in Chapter
26, above), critics such as Robert Young suggest that the formation of notions
of the human and human nature, of ‘humanity and the universal qualities of
the human mind as the common good of an ethical civilization’, coincided
with the development of Western colonialism (Young 1990, 121). And it is not
by chance that the invention of the human takes place at a time when European
imperial expansion makes it necessary to distinguish fundamentally between
European colonizers and colonized natives (who can then be appropriated,
enslaved, exploited, slaughtered). Indeed, inventions of the human, defini-
tions of ‘man’ or ‘mankind’, always seem to be bound up with the exploitation
of their others (whether these others are defined in animal, gender, ethnic or
racial, class or religious terms). Humanism, the logic of humanity, in other
words, is also a dehumanizing discourse. The humanist dimensions of liter-
ature are fully manifested only at the end of the eighteenth century when the
literary work comes to be associated with an autonomous individual, the
‘author’, who produces (or ‘creates’) an ‘original’ body of ‘imaginative’ or (as
it is now often termed) ‘creative’ writing. ‘Literature was specialized towards
imaginative writing’, Raymond Williams remarks, ‘within the basic assump-
tions of Romanticism’, just as the modern sense of ‘individual’, so central256 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
to the new humanism and to the new conception of literature, is linked to
the Enlightenment phase of scientific, political and economic thought that
finds its full expression in the eighteenth century (Williams 1983, 186, 164).
Literary criticism, especially as it has been formulated since the nineteenth
century, is often fundamentally humanist in orientation: F.R. Leavis, for ex-
ample, proclaims that ‘there isa “human culture” to be aimed at that must be
achieved by cultivating a certain autonomy of the human spirit’ (quoted in Day
1996, 111). And recent literary theory (including Marxism, psychoanalysis,
ecocriticism, structuralism, poststructuralism and deconstruction) has often
challenged the anthropocentrism of such criticism precisely with respect to
its allegiance to the tenets of humanism.
Literature, like philosophy and religion, is obsessed with what it means to
be human – whether it’s in the form of Philip Roth’s sense of the human as
morally stained in The Human Stain(2000), or in the form of George Eliot’s
marvellously intricate meditations on human character and spirit in such
novels as The Mill on the Floss(1860) and Daniel Deronda(1876), or in the
form of Jonathan Swift’s misanthropic vision of people as bestial, ignorant,
irrational Yahoos in Gulliver’s Travels(1726). But the question of the human
is provoked in literary texts above all by means of what is not human, and in
post-Romantic literature in particular by the presentation of monsters and
mutants. By presenting beings that are specifically and spectacularly not
human, that are precisely configured as deviations from the human, literary
texts allow us to find ourselves, in Wallace Stevens’s words, ‘more truly and
more strange’ (‘Tea at the Palaz of Hoon’ (1921)).
Perhaps the most compelling and most influential of literary monsters
is Mary Shelley’s creature in her first novel, Frankenstein (1818). But
Frankensteinis also the subject of one of the commonest misapprehensions
in English literature, namely that Frankenstein is the name of a monster. This
is almost as common as the error of thinking that Wordsworth’s poetry is
about daffodils, that James Joyce’s Ulyssesis unreadable, or that John Fowles’s
The Magus is a great novel. In fact, though, there are very few daffodils in
Wordsworth, Ulyssesis a wonderful if challenging novel (and a piece of cake
compared to Finnegans Wake), The Magus is verbose, dull, self-regarding
and (too often) overrated – and Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein is as human as
the rest of us. Victor Frankenstein is a young Genovese man of ‘distin-
guished’ birth who leaves his family to study at the University of Ingolstadt
in Upper Bavaria and there becomes fascinated by the possibility of creat-
ing a living being. The monster that Victor Frankenstein creates in fact
has no name: this itself is doubtless one reason for the confusion and for
the popular idea that Frankenstein is the name of a monster. Naming theMutant 257
monster of Mary Shelley’s novel ‘Frankenstein’, then, is an egregious if
understandable mistake.
But it is worth contemplating the error, it is worth thinking about how and
why it has been such an important dimension of the novel’s reception over
the years since its first publication in 1818, why the inventor’s name has
mutated, morphed, into that of his creature. The error might be seen as valu-
able and instructive for at least two reasons. In the first place, the idea that
‘Frankenstein’ is the name of a monster marks an important division between
the popular idea of Mary Shelley’s novel and the novel itself – the popular idea
as disseminated by theatre and film versions, by the appearance of the monster
in comic books and cartoons, in advertising and TV comedy sketches, in rock
music and on the Internet, rather than any actual reading of Shelley’s book. In
this popular conception of Shelley’s novel, in this common misreading or
non-reading of her text, the name ‘Frankenstein’ often works as shorthand for
‘Frankenstein’s Monster’ or ‘Frankenstein’s Creature’. In a sense there are two
Frankensteins– two ‘texts’ called Frankenstein– one being the novel written
by Mary Shelley, the other being something like an infection, a virus or out-
growth, a mutant transformation of the novel and its dispersal into popular
culture, into popular mythology. The fact that there is a veritable glut of entries
(2,666 items are listed) in D.F. Glut’s The Frankenstein Catalogue (Being a
Comprehensive History of Novels, Translations, Adaptations, Stories, Critical
Works, Popular Articles, Series, Fumetti, Verse, Stage Plays, Films, Cartoons,
Puppetry, Radio and Television Programs, Comics, Satire and Humor, Spoken
and Musical Recordings, Tapes and Sheet Music featuring Frankenstein’s
Monster and/or Descended from Mary Shelley’s Novel)(1984) gives an indica-
tion of the monstrosity of the novel, its uncontrolled, uncontrollable out-
growth. This leads us to our second point, which is that the misnaming of
Shelley’s monster nevertheless expresses a truth. It would be true to say that
‘Frankensteinis a monster’. Frankenstein– the novel – isa kind of mutant or
monster, is, in a sense, monstrous. Victor refers to his own tale as ‘my hideous
narration’, and it is a tale that Walton, who hears it, describes as one to ‘con-
geal’ or ‘curdle’ the blood (Shelley 1994, 222, 233). One contemporary
reviewer even referred to the novel itself as a ‘monstrous literary abortion’
(quoted in Botting 1995, 5).
The way that the novel is constructed seems in fact to bear an uncanny
resemblance to the way that a monster is formed. Both Mary Shelley and
Victor Frankenstein are wisely rather unforthcoming about the mechanics of
creating a monster (you can find out how to construct a nuclear bomb by
surfing the Internet, but you can’t find out how to build Frankenstein’s mon-
ster). All we can gather is that the technique involves the collection of assorted258 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
body parts from dead people and their reconstruction and revivification
through a (vaguely defined) process of surgery, galvanism and electrification.
Victor Frankenstein, we are told, ‘pursue[s] nature to her hiding places...
among the unhallowed damps of the grave’; he ‘collect[s] bones from charnel
houses’ and ‘disturb[s], with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the
human frame’. His laboratory, his ‘workshop of filthy creation’ is ‘a solitary
chamber, or rather cell’ where he collects materials furnished from the
‘dissecting room and the slaughter house’ (Shelley 1994, 83). In principle,
though less gruesomely, Frankensteinis constructed in the same way. In her
1831 Introduction to the novel, Mary Shelley declares that ‘everything has a
beginning’ but that that beginning must necessarily be ‘linked to something
that went before’. Referring to the Hindu belief that the world is supported by
an elephant but that the elephant in turn is supported by a tortoise, Shelley
argues that literary ‘invention’ ‘does not consist in creating out of a void, but
out of chaos’. Literary creation, in other words, like the creation of a monster
or indeed like the theological act of creation, ‘can give form to dark, shapeless
substances but cannot bring into being the substance itself’. Shelley’s com-
ments alert us to the fact that making a literary text is akin to other forms of
making, including most pertinently, the making of monsters. In this respect,
too, her novel is a kind of monster, mutated or created out of her reading.
Shelley draws on contemporary scientific and medical works by Erasmus
Darwin, Humphry Davy and others. She alludes to and quotes contemporary
poets such as Wordsworth, Coleridge, Goethe, and her lover Percy Bysshe
Shelley, as well as Milton and other canonical writers. She engages with works
of social, political and moral philosophy by her father William Godwin and
her mother Mary Wollstonecraft, and with classical works of historiography
by Plutarch and Volney. And before all of these there is the grounding intertext
of that great mutant book of creation, the Bible. In other words, just as
Frankenstein’s creature is constructed out of pieces hewn from dead bodies,
the novel is largely constructed – thematically, verbally, conceptually, intellec-
tually – from the huge corpus of Shelley’s reading, from the writings of the liv-
ing and the dead. And the novel comes across, sometimes rather awkwardly,
monstrously, like something created out of different genres (the Gothic novel
or novels of sensibility, moral or theological disquisitions, novels of ideas),
just as it brings together the rational investigation of Enlightenment science
with the other of that rationality, the discourse of the superstitious, the mon-
strous, the Gothic, the uncanny. The Soviet critic M.M. Bakhtin’s word for
this is ‘heteroglossia’, the distribution within a text of different discourses
or genres or ‘voices’, while Julia Kristeva, Roland Barthes and others call it
‘intertextuality’; our words for it are ‘monstrism’ and ‘mutant’.Mutant 259
This genesis and reception of Shelley’s novel, then, offers a dramatic
instance of a more general law of literature. Literature, we might say, is a mon-
strous or mutant form, a mutant discourse. Literary texts don’t appear out of
nowhere. As we suggest elsewhere in this book, recent literary criticism and
theory has been much concerned with intertextuality, with ways in which a
poem or novel is constructed out of other cultural and literary discourses, the
ways in which texts, ideas and words mutate, ceaselessly evolving and trans-
forming the possibilities of literary forms. This is why literary studies, this
unruly, improper discipline, is in fact truly, properly ‘interdisciplinary’. The
study of literature involves, from the start, a mixing and contamination of dis-
ciplines and genres. Literary criticism and theory are themselves mutant, and
any significantly ‘new’ or ‘original’ critical or theoretical work produces a
mutation in the discipline. Frankensteincan perhaps also help us to grasp how
literary texts are mutated in their reception. Perhaps more virulently than any
other nineteenth-century text, the germ of Frankensteinhas been passed on in
endless mutations. Mutation, in this respect, is central to the process that we
call canonization: for canonization to occur, a text must be inherited, trans-
formed, responded to, deformed, developed, and imitated – in future texts, in
the literary and other traditions to which it gives birth, in being read. Neither
Mary Shelley nor Victor Frankenstein is in control of the monsters s/he cre-
ates. And this is what is monstrous about the monster in general. It is precisely
this fear that we won’t be able to control what we create – a fear that Christians
project onto God’s relationship with his unruly angel, Satan – that defines the
contemporary concern with GM products (so-called ‘Frankenstein Foods’).
And it is a fear expressed in debates surrounding our current crisis of human-
ity, the development of ‘gene therapy’ and the suspicion that these techno-
logies will result in the production of genetically modified people (as if we
weren’t all genetically modified anyway).
Criticism and theory have recently been much taken with mutants and
monsters: ‘English Studies’ sometimes seem to read like an emerging tetralogy,
a study or discourse of monsters. But what is a monster? The OED – that
monster of a book – is, of course, essential reading for students of the monster.
The English word ‘monster’ mutated from the Latin ‘monere’, to warn, a word
related to ‘monare’, ‘to show’: the monster is something shown, in other
words, as a warning. But the complex of senses in which ‘monster’ has been
used in English, the way in which the word has mutated out of this original
sense of warning, is also instructive: the monster is something ‘extraordinary,
or unnatural; a prodigy, a marvel’; it is ‘an animal or plant deviating in one or
more of its parts from the normal type...a misshapen birth, an abortion’;
it is ‘an imaginary animal...having a form either partly brute and partly260 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
human, or compounded of elements from two or more animals’; it is ‘a person
of inhuman and horrible cruelty or wickedness’; and it is ‘an animal of huge
size’ and by association ‘anything of vast and unwieldy proportions’. For
Charles Darwin, a ‘monstrosity’ is ‘some considerable deviation of structure,
generally injurious to or not useful to the species’ (Darwin 1866, 46). All of
these senses are useful for a theory of the monster, but what they make clear,
finally, is the fact that the monster isn’t so much unnatural as something that
comes outof nature, something that goes through and beyond nature. The
monster is both natural and unnatural, a grotesque development of, an out-
growth from or in nature. And it is for this reason that the monster must be
abhorred, rejected, abjected, excluded. But let’s be clear about this: the mon-
ster is excluded, abjected, not because it is entirely other but because it is at
least in part identicalwith that by which it is excluded – with, in this case, the
human. As Diana Fuss comments in this context, ‘sameness, not difference,
provokes our greatest anxiety’ (Fuss 1996: 3). The monster is both of nature
and beyond it: as the OEDinforms us in one citation, ‘the vegetable kingdom
abounds with monsters’. The monster is, indeed, the most natural thing in
the world, and fundamentally allied with birth. Babies are monsters: David
Lynch’s wonderfully dark Eraserhead (1976) knows this, knows what we
fear inside (literally) ourselves and in others; the pregnant Desdemona in
Middlesex knows it too as she ‘prepares to meet the creature hidden in her
womb’ (Eugenides 2002, 123); and ‘monstrous birth’ is also of course the
subject of the play from which the name Desdemona has itself sprouted (see
Othello1.3.396).
In the same way, the mutant, the potentially monstrous genetic deforma-
tion, is primordially a function of birth. In biology, in the theory of evolution,
and in genetics, mutation is a necessary part of the evolution of the species.
The word ‘mutant’ suggests a deformation, transformation, alteration: ‘I am
fully convinced that species are not immutable,’ declares Darwin at the begin-
ning of On the Origin of Species(Darwin 1866, 6). Without mutation, change,
metamorphosis, morphing, no species could develop. Evolution is, therefore,
mutation, and we are all mutations from our parents, as they were mutations
from theirs (children typically have about 100 genetic differences from their
parents, 100 mutations (Ridley 1994, 44)). The mutant is‘nature’, iswhat we
all are: you’re a mutant, we tell you; and your mother was a mutant before you.
Dictionaries are dangerous books. For the 14-year-old Calliope in
Middlesex it is the dictionary that finally allows her to begin to understand
what she is, to begin to confront everything that she fears about herself and
everything that she desires to know. She has heard the gender alignment con-
sultant at the clinic use the word ‘hypospadias’ in relation to her conditionMutant 261
as he probes and photographs her, so she checks out the word in Webster’s
Dictionary. Presenting its definition, the dictionary directs Calliope to look up
‘eunuch’. The entry for that word in turn directs her to ‘hermaphrodite’. A
hermaphrodite has the ‘sex organs and many of the secondary characteristics
of both male and female’, Calliope reads, and the word includes ‘anything
comprised of a combination of diverse or contradictory elements’. Then the
dictionary directs her to ‘see synonyms at MONSTER’. ‘The synonym was
official, authoritative’, Calliope thinks:
it was the verdict that the culture gave on a person like her. Monster. That
was what she was. That was what Dr. Luce and his colleagues had been
saying. It explained so much, really. It explained her mother crying in the
next room. It explained the false cheer in Milton’s voice. It explained why
her parents had brought her to New York, so that the doctors could work in
secret. It explained the photographs, too. What did people do when they
came upon Bigfoot or the Loch Ness Monster? They tried to get a picture.
For a second Callie saw herself that way. As a lumbering, shaggy creature
pausing at the edge of the woods. As a humped convolvulus rearing its
dragon’s head from an icy lake. (Eugenides 2002, 431–2)
Further reading
For three recent collections of essays on the question of the human see Fuss,
ed., Human, All Too Human(1996), Brewster et al., eds, Inhuman Reflections
(2000), Neil Badmington, ed., Posthumanism (2000), and Marquard
Smith and Joanne Morra, eds, The Prosthetic Impulse(2006). Tony Davies’s
Humanism(1997) is a good short introduction to the historical development
of ideas of humanism, while John Gray’s Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans
and Other Animals (2002) is a provocative critique of the fondly held idea
of the human and of humanism in Western culture. On monsters, see Clark
and Royle, eds, Monstrism(2002), and there is a good short chapter on the
monster and the Gothic in Punter and Byron, The Gothic(2003). On mon-
sters and aliens in popular culture, see Elaine Graham’s Representations of the
Post/Human(2002); on monsters in Shakespeare and the Renaissance, see
Mark Thornton Burnett, Constructing ‘Monsters’ in Shakespearean Drama
and Early Modern Culture (2002). On the abhuman, see Kelly Hurley’s
The Gothic Body (1996). Tzvetan Todorov’s On Human Diversity (1993)
examines the question of definitions of the human from the Enlightenment
onwards, calling for a new and newly enlightened humanism.

29. The performative
I‘ confess my ignorance’: Chambers Dictionarygives this as an example of a
performative. The word ‘performative’, declared J.L. Austin in 1956, ‘is
a new word and an ugly word, and perhaps it does not mean anything very
much. But at any rate there is one thing in its favour, it is not a profound word’
(Austin 1970, 233). The present chapter is concerned to sort out what
this rather odd, perhaps unprofound word does mean. A performative is a
statement that not only describes an action but actually performs that action.
A performative is, in principle at least, the opposite of a constative state-
ment. A constative statement involves a description of how things seem to be,
a statement or assertion of something that can be true or false. ‘The teachers
are ignorant’, for example.
All language can be thought about in terms of the constative and the perfor-
mative. On the one hand, there is language as descriptive, as saying something
about something. On the other, there is language as performative, as not only
saying something but doingor performingsomething at the same time. ‘I do’
(as words spoken by the prospective wife or husband in answer to a particular
question in the marriage service), ‘I declare this meeting inquorate’, ‘I promise
to pay the bearer on demand the sum of twenty pounds’: these are all examples
in which language is clearly supposed to be doing something. If it were not,
marriage would be impossible, committee meetings would never end (or,
more happily, might never take place at all) and a twenty-pound note would be
quite worthless, a mere curiosity. The distinction between constative and per-
formative statements is derived from a particular strand of Anglo-American
philosophy known as speech-act theory. Speech-act theory is most famously
associated with the work of the Oxford philosopher J.L. Austin and in par-
ticular with his book entitled How to do Things with Words (1962). It hasThe performative 263
become an important area of contemporary philosophy and linguistics but
has also proved groundbreaking in the field of literary criticism and theory.
At first this idea may seem baffling. Surely, we may tell ourselves, literary
texts are simply ‘words on a page’ and moreover words that relate to fictional
or poetic worlds, not to the so-called real world in which marriage ceremonies
are genuinely performed, committee meetings truly take place and money is
real. But the truth of the matter is a little more complicated than this. Literary
texts can indeed be considered from the perspective of the performative. The
American poet Wallace Stevens points us in this direction when he writes in
a letter, in 1945: ‘the power of literature is that in describing the world it
creates what it describes...You are describing a world and by describing it
you are creating it’ (Stevens 1966, 495). It is in this respect that we may recall
that the very word ‘poetry’ comes from the Greek verb poieein, ‘to make’, ‘to
create’: this suggests that poetry might in fact be a making or doing, as much as
a saying or stating.
In order to start exploring this idea in more detail, we will look at one or
two poems that are particularly illuminating in this context. First of all, John
Keats’s ‘This Living Hand’ (written c. 1819):
This living hand, now warm and capable
Of earnest grasping, would, if it were cold
And in the icy silence of the tomb,
So haunt thy days and chill thy dreaming nights
That thou would wish thine own heart dry of blood
So in my veins red life might stream again,
And thou be conscience-calm’d—see here it is—
I hold it towards you—
These chilling lines, which as it happens were not published until 1892, more
than 70 years after Keats’s death, are apparently aboutthis death. The text
functions as a bizarre and complex kind of curse or threat: it suggests that if
the writer were dead (if this hand were no longer living but cold and in the
grave), ‘you’ – the reader – would be so haunted that you would be willing to
die in order that the writer could live again. The last words then weirdly sug-
gest that this hand really is still living, despite the fact that we know the poet is
dead: ‘see here it is— / I hold it towards you—’.
Keats’s poem may or may not be ‘unfinished’: we only have the text as
recorded in the margin of a manuscript of another poem. Our doubt as to
whether it is a fragment or a finished poem is part of a more general sense of
uncertainty. ‘This Living Hand’ promotes a strong sense of the strangeness of
writing as such. It testifies on the one hand (as it were) to the fact that a hand,264 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
the writer’s or anyone else’s, is always capable of being outlived by the writing
which it produces. Paradoxically, what lives on is the writing and not the hand.
On the other hand (so to speak), the poem insists – in a quite threatening and
disturbing way – on the power that language has to be deictic, to point (like,
precisely, a finger) and to say ‘this’ (‘This living hand’) and ‘here’ (‘here it is’),
now, in a strangely ‘icy’ present. We may not know how we feel about this
poem, we may not know how to understand or earnestly ‘grasp’ it. But how-
ever we may want to think about it, one thing seems clear: the poem is doing
something to us as readers. It can be related to the notion of the performative
in at least two ways: first, in that it is a threat and, second, in that it enactsthe
curious logic of holding out a hand (‘This living hand’) to us as readers, here
and now. Austin notes, in How to do Things with Words, that the classic exam-
ples of performatives are ‘all with verbs in the first person singular present
indicative active...Examples are “I name”, “I do”, “I bet”, “I give” ’ (Austin
1962, 56). Other instances might include ‘I promise’, ‘I swear’, ‘I bequeath’,
‘I forgive (you)’, ‘I love (you)’, ‘I order (you)’, ‘I confess’, ‘I profess’, ‘I testify’,
and on on. Austin also adds that another ‘useful criterion’ for a performative
statement is the presence, whether explicit or implicit, of the word ‘hereby’
(57). Keats’s poem, whether considered as finished or unfinished, is clearly
saying in some sense: I hereby threaten and haunt you. (To threaten is another
sort of performative: indeed, as we hereby promise to show in greater detail
below, a promise is itself a sort of threat and a threat a promise.)
Here is another example, a three-line poem by the contemporary English
poet Michael Ayres, entitled ‘Bittersweet’ (1993):
Survivors again. I never thought we’d make it.
I never thought I could be forgotten,
Or that it would be so bittersweet.
There are intriguing similarities between the Keats and Ayres poems. Both
are concerned with the idea of survival and both can be read as poems about
themselves, in other words as poems that are self-reflexive or self-referential.
And like ‘This Living Hand’, ‘Bittersweet’ is self-reflexive in a decidedly
paradoxical sense. The deployment of the title-word ‘bittersweet’ at the very
end of the poem establishes the self-reflexive or self-referential dimension: it
invites us to suppose that what ‘would be so bittersweet’ would be the poem of
that title, the poem we are or have just been reading. The word ‘bittersweet’ at
the end of the poem leads us back to the beginning of the poem, or rather to the
very title of the poem, in a way that calls to mind Coleridge’s favourite image
for a story – that of the ouroboros, or snake with its tail in its mouth. If theThe performative 265
sense of time in this poem is paradoxical, so too of course is the very word
‘bittersweet’. This word is an oxymoron – an apparent contradiction in terms,
comparable to Milton’s phrase ‘darkness visible’ (Paradise Lost, I, 63).
Finally, Ayres’s poem is paradoxical as regards the idea of being forgotten.
The ‘I’ of this poem declares, ‘I never thought I could be forgotten’. This can
be read as saying ‘I never thought I could be forgotten and look, sure enough,
I haven’t been’, but it can also be read as saying the opposite: ‘I never thought
I could be forgotten but the truth is that I have been.’ The more plausible of
these interpretations would perhaps be the latter, but if we read the poem in
this way we encounter what appears to be its central paradox: being a survivor
involves being forgotten. How should we make sense of this? One way would
be to say that this is a love poem about the bittersweet experience of surviving
some crisis or great difficulty in a relationship: the ‘I’ of the poem survives but
only at the cost of no longer being the ‘I’ he (or she) used to be. We are left,
in this case, with the enigma of an ‘I’ who has been forgotten, but who never-
theless survives in writing, that is to say, in the very words of the poem. If ‘I’
simply depends on writing, then perhaps so does the ‘we’ referred to in the
first line. This ‘we’, in turn, could be read not only as referring to the speaker
and the speaker’s lover, for example, but also as referring to ourselves, the
poem’s readers. In this sense the poem would be doing something to us,
turning us into survivors: reading becomes bittersweet.
As if haunted by an aftertaste, we could carry on trying to describe here
what ‘This Living Hand’ and ‘Bittersweet’ seem to be doing as poems. The
basic point, however, is precisely that: they are not poems that are simply
descriptive, they are also performative. Keats’s text pulls us into its strange
and icy grasp, Ayres’s poem makes reading bittersweet. Both poems are
in fact kinds of riddle. Each is saying, in effect: without your being able fully
to understand it, this is a poem about the fact that you have read it. Each
of these poems draws particular attention to the fact that it is writing and
that it can survive its author, like a monument. In this respect both poems
exploit the monumentalizing character of writing in a way similar to that
of Shakespeare’s sonnet 55:
Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes, shall outlive this pow’rful rime,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmear’d with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn
The living record of your memory.266 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
’Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
So till the judgment that yourself arise,
You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.
This is a love poem which asserts that it will ‘outlive’ marble, gilded monu-
ments, masonry and so on. It is thus concerned with the idea that writing – and
this text in particular – has a capacity for monumentalization greater than that
of anything else that humans might create. Because the poem itself will last
until the end of the world (‘the ending doom’), so will the memory of the lover
who is being addressed. The haunting irony of Shakespeare’s poem is that it
constitutes not only the ‘living record’ of the lover’s ‘memory’ but also the very
existence of this lover: ‘You live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.’ The poem is
not simply a ‘record’. Rather, the lover (‘you’) only exists thanks to these four-
teen lines. Poetry, then, in keeping with its etymology, can be performative in
the most radical way: it can create ‘you’.
The notion of the performative is extremely helpful for thinking about lit-
erature, then, because it allows us to appreciate that literary texts not only
describe but perform. Literary texts not only say but do things: they do things
with words and do things to us. More precisely they do things by saying.
They create the world they describe (to recall the phrasing from Stevens we
cited earlier), but this creation is not a single event, occurring at the time of
writing: it happens with every new reading of the literary work. After declar-
ing, in his poem ‘In Memory of W.B. Yeats (d. Jan. 1939)’, that ‘poetry makes
nothing happen’, the poet W.H. Auden qualifies and even contradicts this by
observing that ‘it survives’, as ‘A way of happening, a mouth’. (The mouth and
way of happening here would have to do with the reader at least as much as
with the writer.) Alongside this we could juxtapose a remark made by Jacques
Derrida, who says: ‘promising is inevitable as soon as we open our mouths –
or rather as soon as there is a text’ (Derrida 1986a, 98). A promise is, of course,
a classic example of a performative. In this context we might consider looking
at poems and other literary texts for examples of the poet, author, narrator or
characters literally making promises to the reader or to other characters.
Literary texts are more ‘promise-cramm’d’ (to borrow Shakespeare’s phrase:
see HamletIII, ii, 88) than one might have supposed. Everywhere in a literary
work, for example, that we encounter suspense, deferral of explanation,
withholding of facts or truth, hinted at revelation, anticipation, prolepsis or
flash-forward, the logic of the promise is at work.The performative 267
More generally, it is a matter of recognizing that literary texts are, in their
very structure, promises. To recall an example that Derrida gives: ‘A title is
always a promise’ (Derrida 1986a, 115). Even (or especially) with its title, a
literary text has begun to promise. As soon as there is a text, perhaps before
anyone (the poet, author, narrator or character) even opens their mouth, the
performativity of a promise is under way. In order to get a sharper sense of the
way a title works as a promise, we could consider how a text might be read if
it had a different title from the one it has been given. Imagine Shakespeare’s
King Learif it were retitled Cordelia, or Sylvia Plath’s ‘Daddy’ if it were retitled
‘Why I Love a Fascist’. Tom Stoppard captures this bizarrerie in his script for
Shakespeare in Love(1998, dir. John Madden) where the Bard’s working title
for Romeo and Julietis Romeo and Ethel the Pirate’s Daughter. And we might
wonder how differently we would conceive T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Landhad
Ezra Pound not persuaded his friend to alter the title from He Do the Police in
Different Voices. With a different title, a quite different kind of promise is being
made: the work starts doing something quite different to us.
Let us conclude with a few words about one of these examples, Sylvia
Plath’s poem ‘Daddy’. This poem is about the speaker’s love and hatred of
her father and describes the process by which she comes to exorcise him – by
‘killing’ him twice and finally driving a stake through his heart. ‘Daddy’ neatly
encapsulates many of the points we have been discussing in this chapter. If
‘Daddy’ is a particularly crucial word for this poem, starting from its very title,
so too is the word ‘do’. Plath’s text is fundamentally about doingand most
of all, we can suggest, about doing by saying, about doing things with words.
‘You do not do’, the poem emphatically opens. ‘I do, I do’, the speaker
exclaims. A powerfully disturbing rhetorical mixture of a marriage and an
execution, Plath’s poem appears at once to describe and perform the pro-
cess by which the speaker can finally disconnect herself from the addressee
(‘The black telephone’s off at the root’) and conclude: ‘Daddy, daddy, you
bastard, I’m through’. The force of the poem involves the sense that the
speaker is exorcising her father asshe speaks, that these words are what finally
get rid of him. The text is like a poetic equivalent of psychoanalysis as ‘the
talking cure’. Whether or not we construe Plath’s poem as autobiographical,
‘Daddy’ operates in the form of a kind of confession. (It is not by chance
that Plath’s work is identified with the ‘confessional school’ of poetry.) It is
here, too, that we might note how profoundly the notion of the performative
illuminates the intimate depths of psychoanalysis, just as it does the genre of
autobiography. At some level all autobiography has a confessional character: it
entails an ‘I confess’ (however implicit this may be) in which the person
confessing makes the truth.268 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
We have been dealing mainly with poems in this chapter, since they provide
an especially clear sense of how the ‘I’ of the text, or how the text itself, can be
seen to create and transform – to perform. But as the example of titles indic-
ates, the idea of the performative is of fundamental importance for all literary
texts. In conclusion we would like to suggest another way of approaching
this, namely to consider that every literary text is a kind of letter. It is a text
addressed privately to each of us, me or you in isolation, at the same time as
being a letter that has been made public, published. To read a literary text is to
agree to the idea of a possible relationship. The literary text – whether poem,
play, short story or novel – is a letter, and by reading it you become its recipi-
ent. Pursuing this analogy between a literary text and a letter, J. Hillis Miller
argues that what is particularly striking about the performative dimension of
literature is that it is in some ways fundamentally unpredictable. Literary texts
give an exemplary ‘twist’ to the conventional, Austinian notion of the perfor-
mative. Miller writes: ‘The “twist” lies in the fact that the performative power
of the letter is not foreseen or intended. This is contrary to the strict concept
of a performative utterance as defined by Austin’ (Miller 1991, 172). We have
tried to suggest the workings of such a ‘twist’ in the paradoxical and ‘riddling’
effects of the poems we have looked at: poems are performative but not in ways
that we can necessarily expect or completely, earnestly grasp. Indeed, the
‘twist’ may consist in the very failure intimated here. Every performative (a
promise or threat or whatever) is haunted by the necessary possibility that
it will fail or go astray. The ‘twist’ of performatives in literature might be illus-
trated in relation to the final words of Sylvia Plath’s poem ‘Daddy’: ‘Daddy,
daddy, you bastard, I’m through’. Something appears to be happening here,
but what? Is calling daddy ‘bastard’ a way of renouncing his legitimacy and
thus, as it were, excommunicating him? What does ‘I’m through’ mean? Can
the ‘I’ say this, while still addressing ‘daddy’? Does ‘I’m through’ mean ‘I am
finished’ or ‘I havefinished’? Or does it mean, paradoxically, that the ‘I’ is
finally through to‘daddy’, only now, beyond the last word of the poem, finally
able to address him?
Further reading
J. Hillis Miller’s work on performatives is particularly accessible. See his
excellent studies Tropes, Parables, Performatives (1991) and Speech Acts
in Literature(2001). For an essay specifically focusing on the poetic and the
riddle, see his ‘Deconstruction and a Poem’ (Miller 2000). More difficult but
extremely good are the essays of Paul de Man, for instance in his Allegories
of Reading(1979). De Man gives some startling accounts of literary texts asThe performative 269
works of persuasion. From a more psychoanalytically oriented perspective,
see also Shoshana Felman’s challenging but thought-provoking studies, The
Literary Speech Act (1983) and (especially of interest regarding the act of
promising in relation to literature, philosophy and Lacanian psychoanalysis)
The Scandal of the Speaking Body (2003). On the performative in the con-
text of British and German Romanticism, see Esterhammer’s fine book
The Romantic Performative(2000). Judith Butler’s work, especially Gender
Trouble (1990), Bodies That Matter (1993) and Excitable Speech (1997),
offers a complex but compelling account of identity, gender and politics in
general as ‘performative’ in ways explicitly indebted to J.L. Austin, even if he
would not readily have recognized them. Jonathan Culler has a helpful and
stimulating account of Butler and performative language in his Literary
Theory: A Very Short Introduction(1997).

30. Secrets
Why do we read works of literature? What do we hope to get out of
reading a novel, for example? In an essay entitled ‘Secrets and
Narrative Sequence’, Frank Kermode writes: ‘To read a novel expecting the
satisfactions of closure and the receipt of a message is what most people find
enough to do; they are easier with this method because it resembles the one
that works for ordinary acts of communication’ (Kermode 1983, 138). Most
people, according to Kermode, read novels in the hope of reading something
that adds up to a complete whole – a story with a clear structure and ‘message’.
They are looking for a good storyline – something to get their teeth into on
a long train journey, for example, something which has a strong sense of
what Kermode calls ‘narrative sequence’. This is what is implied by the term
‘consumer-fiction’: to read a novel is to consume it. If a good novel is like
a good meal, some novels are no doubt easier to chew and swallow than
others. Stephen King’s The Shiningwould be fast food in comparison with
the feast of Henry James’s The Golden Bowl. Kermode is working with a very
basic model: novels can be compared with ‘ordinary acts of communication’
(by which he presumably means things like successfully negotiating your
order with the person behind the service counter at Burger King) and most
novel-reading is as simple and as sequential as abc. There are, however, things
which get in the way of narrative sequence, and these are what Kermode
calls secrets: ‘secrets’, he argues, ‘are at odds with sequence’ (138). What he is
referring to here is the idea of textual details, specific aspects of the language
of a text, particular patterns of images or rhetorical figures that a reader
may not even notice on a ‘consumerist’ reading, but that are nevertheless
present and which can provoke a sense of mystery. Thus Kermode focusesSecrets 271
on the enigmatic, repeated but apparently superfluous references to black and
white in Joseph Conrad’s Under Western Eyes(1911).
It may be that what draws many people towards the study of literature
(the desire not only to consume the novels of, say, James, Conrad or Stephen
King, but also to reflect on their cultural, historical and ideological context, on
how these novels work and what effects they produce) is a fascination with the
possibilities of secrets. As we shall try to show in this chapter, the relationship
between literature, secrecy and secrets is fundamental. Indeed, we would
like to suggest that in many respects the question, ‘What is literature?’ can be
considered as synonymous with the question, ‘What is a secret?’
A secret is what is concealed, deliberately or inadvertently hidden, kept
separate and apart. (The word ‘secret’ comes from the Latin secernere, where
se-signifies ‘apart’ and cernere is ‘to separate’.) Even the most rapidly con-
sumed of novels involve secrets, if only because narratives are linear and the
contents of a work cannot be presented all at once. Every narrative can be
defined as a process of unfolding and revelation. It is precisely because there
are things that remain hidden from us, and because we want to know what
these things are, that we continue to read. This is the general context in
which Roland Barthes elaborates his notion of the ‘hermeneutic code’. The
hermeneutic code concerns everything in a text that has to do with the creation
of an enigma and its possible clarification and explanation. In this respect it is
perhaps helpful to recall that etymologically the word ‘enigma’ is linked to
fable and storytelling. It derives from the Greek verb ainissesthai, ‘to speak
allusively or obscurely’, from ainos, ‘a fable’. The most obvious example of
enigma in the context of literary narratives is the whodunnit detective story:
the question ‘whodunnit?’ forms the central enigma of the text and the
hermeneutic code involves ‘the various (formal) terms by which an enigma
can be distinguished, suggested, formulated, held in suspense, and finally
disclosed’ (Barthes 1990b, 19). Why is this character doing this, for instance
phoning the police or watching a letter burn on the fire? What is the sig-
nificance of such and such an object, for instance the concrete-mixer in the
cellar? How does this moment in the narrative throw light on the enigma of
the crime? What is about to be revealed? All these questions are hermeneutic
– they have to do with a work of interpretation and the hope or expectation or
desire that the text will provide the answers. The mystery story or whodunnit
is a particularly striking example, since (as its name indicates) it is explicitly
concerned with drawing the reader into a mystery, and with manipulating her
or him into asking questions, becoming watchful for ‘clues’ and looking for an
explanation. In this sense, the pleasure of detective stories involves reading
as itself a form of detecting.272 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
But the mystery story or whodunnit is only one example of something that
is much more general about the relationship between narratives and secrets.
For, in an important sense, Chandler’s The Little Sister (1949) or William
McIlvanney’s Laidlaw (1977) are no different from, say, D.H. Lawrence’s
The Virgin and the Gipsy(1930) or Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye(1970).
All of these novels involve various forms of mystery and concealment: they
inevitably hold back a full revelation of what happens, releasing this informa-
tion only gradually. More importantly perhaps, they generate a sense of
mystery and secrecy through the very institution of the so-called omniscient
narrator. The idea of such a narrator is basically magical or occult (the word
‘occult’, it may be noted, literally means ‘hidden’, ‘secret’): such narratives are
structured by powers of foresight. For it is invariably part of what is called
omniscient narration (including what is known as ‘realist fiction’) that the
narrator ‘knows’ the future and that this power of foresight is implicitly or
explicitly articulated at numerous moments in a given narrative.
The Virgin and the Gipsy, for example, opens as follows:
When the vicar’s wife went off with a young and penniless man the scandal
knew no bounds. Her two little girls were only seven and nine years old
respectively. And the vicar was such a good husband. True, his hair was
grey. But his moustache was dark, he was handsome, and still full of furtive
passion for his unrestrained and beautiful wife.
Why did she go? Why did she burst away with such an éclatof revulsion,
like a touch of madness?
Nobody gave any answer. Only the pious said she was a bad woman.
While some of the good women kept silent. They knew.
The two little girls never knew. (167)
This passage not only plays on the idea of secrecy as something related to a
particular character (the vicar’s ‘furtive passion’) but, through its apparent
omniscient narration, sets up various kinds of secret knowledge. The ‘good
women kept silent’ because they ‘knew’: ‘knew what?’ we ask ourselves. ‘The
two little girls never knew’: this, too, the narrator knows though does not, at
least for the moment, reveal to us. What is it that the narrator knows? What is
it that the two little girls ‘never knew’? The ‘never’, in particular, is a subtle and
eerie word, suggesting that the perspective from which the narrator speaks is
in fact posthumous as regards the girls themselves. On rereading – that is to
say, with the benefits of readerly hindsight – we may find this word ‘never’ even
more peculiar, since the two girls who ‘never knew’ do not die, in fact, in the
course of the narrative. In this context one might want to ask: What planet, or
fictional world, does this narrator come from?Secrets 273
Of course, narrators are just linguistic fabrications, textual creatures.
Nevertheless, we are drawn into their worlds and a crucial part of the magic,
sorcery or ‘occultism’ of literary narratives has to do with the mysterious but
seductive ‘reality’ of the narrator. An omniscient narrator is a strange figure,
by its very nature. The strangeness consists not only in the basic idea of
omniscience itself, but also in what is concealed or glossed over within that
omniscience. Omniscience is itself a fiction, a strange invention of literary crit-
ics drawing on the obviously problematic identification between an author or
narrator and the Christian God. (As the OEDmakes clear, the word ‘omni-
scient’ originally referred specifically to ‘the omniscient Being, the Deity’.)
Omniscient narrators may appear to be all-knowing, or at least to know a lot;
but they are certainly not all-telling. A narrator is always secretive, in other
words, and this secretiveness concerns both the notion of storytelling-as-
gradual-revelation and the question of what we do not and perhaps can never
know about this narrator. Thus one of the most secretive or enigmatic aspects
of a literary narrative may very well concern the character of its narrator (so-
called omniscient or not): what, for example, are we to make of the narrator
of Henry James’s Washington Square, or Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness,
or Virginia Woolf’s Mrs Dalloway?
Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye, on the other hand, involves the final revela-
tion that the two primary narrators (a so-called omniscient narrator and one
of the characters, Claudia) are apparently the same: such a revelation does not
serve to clarify or rationalize the nature of the storytelling but, on the contrary,
exacerbates the reader’s sense of the narrator-as-enigma. The Bluest Eyeindeed
begins with mystery – with the enigmatic presentation (and equally enigmatic
repetition or re-presentation) of the text of what appears to be a US school
primer: ‘Here is the house. It is green and white. It has a red door. It is very
pretty. Here is the family’ (7). In a forcefully disjunctive way this opening switches,
without any explanation, to a passage of italicized text which starts: ‘Quiet as
it’s kept, there were no marigolds in the fall of 1941. We thought, at the time,
that it was because Pecola was having her father’s baby that the marigolds did
not grow’ (9). There is a sense here of a narrator speaking knowledgeably from
a position of hindsight (‘We thought, at the time’), of someone who knows
things which may or may not be revealed as the narrative unfolds. More
provocatively, however, we are left with the mysteriousness of the first four
words, ‘Quiet as it’s kept’. What is ‘it’, Who or what is keeping quiet? Why are
we being alerted to what appears to be secret and why should it be kept quiet?
Is the narrator imparting information to the reader or keeping quiet about it?
If a logic of secrecy, concealment and revelation is crucial to the workings
of any novel, it is also evident in less obviously narrative texts such as lyric274 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
poetry. Consider the following poem (No. 180), written around 1859, by
Emily Dickinson:
Our lives are Swiss—
So still—so Cool—
Till some odd afternoon
The Alps neglect their Curtains
And we look farther on!
Italystands the other side!
While like a guard between—
The solemn Alps—
The siren Alps—
Forever intervene!
This poem is about what is concealed or hidden from us: it gestures towards
something secret. It suggests that there are moments of revelation or epiphany
(‘some odd afternoon’) when we are able to ‘look farther on’ – beyond the
Alps. These moments, or this moment (since technically only one ‘odd after-
noon’ is mentioned), might be compared to what Wordsworth calls ‘spots of
time’ or Hardy ‘moments of vision’. Dickinson’s poem appears, at least on one
level, to describe or relate such a moment and to attribute great significance to
it. But if there is a revelation, if the secret and perhaps the meaning of our lives
is being referred to here, what is it? The poem says only that ‘we look farther
on’ and that ‘Italystands the other side’: it remains unclear what it is that is
being revealed at this moment when ‘The Alps neglect their Curtains’. Is it
‘Italy’ simply? But what does ‘Italy’ mean? The word ‘Forever’ in the final line
of the poem underlines the strangeness of what is going on here and the con-
tinuing or unresolved enigmaof what the poem has to tell us. The definiteness
and absoluteness of ‘forever’ confirms, in effect, the sense that this poem at
once reveals and can never reveal its secret.
Dickinson’s poem could in fact be described as exemplary of literary texts
in general. In particular, it dramatizes the fact that the notion of a secret is
paradoxical. Jacques Derrida has formulated the paradox as follows: ‘There
is something secret. But it does not conceal itself’ (Derrida 1992b, 21). In an
essay called ‘Derrida’s Topographies’, J. Hillis Miller offers a helpful account
of this paradox. On the one hand, Miller points out, ‘We normally think of a
secret as in principle discoverable’ (Miller 1994, 16): Kermode’s ‘satisfactions
of closure’ and ‘the receipt of a message’ and Barthes’s ‘hermeneutic code’
make sense only if we accept this principle. There is closure and there is aSecrets 275
message to the extent that ‘All is revealed’. There is a valid hermeneutic effort
or labour of interpretation because there is something to be interpreted,
seized, comprehended. On the other hand, however, there is the question of
what Miller calls a ‘true secret’. He notes: ‘a true secret, if there is such a thing,
cannot ever, by any means, be revealed’ (17). And Miller then elaborates on
the Derridean paradox: ‘A true secret...is not hidden somewhere...A
true secret is all on the surface. This superficiality cannot by any hermeneutic
procedures, material or linguistic, be gone behind. A literary text (and any text
may be taken as literary) says what it says’ (17). Thus, in Dickinson’s poem,
there would be the enigmatic, perhaps ultimately cryptic status of ‘Italy’:
there is nothing ‘within’ or ‘behind’ this appositely italicized ‘Italy’. The text
says (only) what it says: ‘Italy stands the other side!’ It does not say that
‘Italy’ symbolizes ‘romance’ or that it represents ‘revolution’ or even that it can
be taken as a synonym for ‘the secret’. However superficial or profound or
elliptical, it simply says what it says. In these terms, then, it is not only a ques-
tion of literature as involving secrets that are concealed and that are gradually
or finally brought to light. It is also – and perhaps more enigmatically – a
matter of a secrecy that does not involve any kind of concealment at all.
A literary text ‘says what it says’: it says, for example, that ‘we look farther
on!’ Or it says, at the very outset, what its title is. Perhaps the secrecy of literary
works begins with titles themselves. Perhaps what makes a work ‘literary’ is
in part that its title remains enigmatic. A literary text says that it is called
‘The Virgin and the Gipsy’ or ‘The Bluest Eye’ or, say, ‘The Shining’. What
do these titles refer to? Does Lawrence’s text, for example, finally and clearly
establish what is to be understood by ‘the dark, tremulous potent secret of...
virginity’ (207), or what is meant by the idea of a gipsy, of a figure that is appar-
ently outside ‘the vast and gruesome clutch of our law’ (236)? And what is the
status and significance of the conjunctive (‘and’) in the title of this Lawrence
text? What does ‘and’ mean? Conversely, what is signified by ‘the bluest eye’
and in the eyes of which reader or beholder? Or again, what do those two
words, ‘the shining’, have to tell us? Each of these examples, in fact, resists
what Kermode refers to as ‘the satisfactions of closure’ and ‘the receipt of a
message’. It is their readability andtheir resistance to being read that makes
them ‘literary’, in Hillis Miller’s terms. This is in part at least why the question
‘What is literature?’ is inseparable from the question ‘What is a secret?’
It has been traditional to think of meaning as something behind or within
the words of a text. Reading has conventionally been thought of on the basis of
a surface-depth model, with the words of the text as the surface and the mean-
ing lurking somewhere inside or underneath. The text has secrets and often
explicitly conveys and exploits the idea that it has the power to disclose or276 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
preserve these secrets. With poststructuralist accounts of literature, how-
ever, there has been an important shift away from this surface-depth model.
This is not to say that the surface-depth model is no longer relevant. Indeed,
it is very difficult to think about meaning or about reading without relying to a
considerable extent on the values and assumptions of this model. Moreover,
as we have been trying to suggest, virtually every literary text can be seen to
work with this model. This is, in short, the theory and practice of secrets as (in
principle) discoverable. Poststructuralism, however, is generally suspicious
about any reading of a literary text that would equate a secret with the ‘com-
plete’ or ‘ultimate’ meaning. Poststructuralism pays particular attention to the
paradoxical nature of secrets – to the fact that secrets can be undiscoverable
and yet at the same time unconcealed. In this sense the secrets of a literary text
may be right in front of our eyes and yet they remain secret, like ‘the purloined
letter’ on the mantelpiece in Edgar Allan Poe’s story of that title, or like the
solemn, siren Alps, some odd afternoon.
To conclude, we could briefly consider secrets in two further ways. At the
beginning of this chapter we put forward the hypothesis that what attracts
many people to the study of literature is a fascination with the idea of secrets.
We have sought to elaborate on this by considering some of the many respects
in which literary texts are bound up with the enigmatic, mysterious, secret
and (in a double sense) occult. And we have attempted to emphasize the im-
portant paradox whereby secrets can be discoverable but that a ‘true secret’,
if there is such a thing, can never be discovered. Our focus has been on texts
and on how they compel, manipulate and fascinate their readers. But there
is also another perspective from which to think about literature and secrets.
This would be from that of the reader rather than the text, and in particular
as regards the notion of a reader who is interested not so much in the idea
of secrets in the text(whodunnit? what is going to happen next? and so on)
but rather in the possibilities of secrets within herself or within himself,
secrets that may have to do with dreams, memories, fantasies, speculations,
apprehensions and desires set off by the text, thoughts and feelings that may
never have been experienced before – that is to say, in a surprising way, secret
thoughts and feelings. It is in this context that literary texts can be acknow-
ledged as having uncanny powers, including an ability to alter people’s very
sense of themselves, of their identity and ‘place’.
Secondly, we might try to think about the possibility of a ‘true secret’ within
ourselves, about the paradox of what a ‘true secret’ might be. This touches on
what we refer to in the following chapter as ‘the unpresentable’. The name
which is sometimes given to this notion of a true secret is ‘death’. The Ghost
of Hamlet’s father comes to Hamlet and says:Secrets 277
But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end
Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. (I, v, 14–21)
The Ghost at once tells and does not tell. The Ghost keeps the secrets
of its prison-house even as it evokes the effects of their disclosure. This is
another way of talking about the enigma of literature: whether in the form of
Shakespearean tragedy or a contemporary whodunnit, literature is about
what cannot be told, and in particular about that impossible package holiday
which Hamlet refers to as that ‘undiscover’d country, from whose bourn / No
traveller returns’ (III, i, 78–9). This undiscovered country is neither inside us
nor outside us. It is a secret that does not conceal itself: the fact that we are
going to die but that, as Freud puts it, ‘It is indeed impossible to imagine our
own death; and whenever we attempt to do so we can perceive that we are in
fact still present as spectators’ (Freud 1985a, 77).
Further reading
Besides the readable and stimulating essay on ‘Secrets and Narrative
Sequence’ (1983), Frank Kermode has written an important study entitled
The Genesis of Secrecy(1979) which deals with various questions about, for
example, ‘why narratives are obscure’, why we prefer an enigma to ‘a muddle’,
and so on. Barthes’s S/Z (1990b) contains brilliant insights into senses of
secrecy and enigma in reading. Especially in its focus on silence and the
unspoken, Pierre Macherey’s A Theory of Literary Production (1978) is a
powerful account of literary secrets in relation to politics and ideology. On
literary fiction and the omniscient narrator, see Royle’s ‘The “Telepathy
Effect”: Notes toward a Reconsideration of Narrative Fiction’ (in Royle 2003)
and Jonathan Culler, ‘Omniscience’ in The Literary in Theory(2007). From
a quite different, intensively psychoanalytic perspective, Esther Rashkin’s
Family Secrets(1992) is a thought-provoking study of secrets and crypts in
mainly nineteenth-century literary works. Jacques Derrida has written numer-
ous essays about secrets: see, in particular, the fascinating but difficult
‘Fors’ (Derrida 1986b) and ‘Passions’ (Derrida 1992b), as well as the highly278 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
illuminating discussions in A Taste for the Secret(Derrida and Ferraris, 2001).
In his essay on ‘Derrida’s Topographies’ (1994), on the other hand, J. Hillis
Miller provides an excellent account of Derrida’s work on secrets (especially
‘Fors’) and more generally a rich and accessible introduction to ‘Derrida and
literature’. For a more difficult but also valuable study, Esther Rashkin’s
Unspeakable Secrets and the Psychoanalysis of Culture (2008) looks at ex-
amples of film and literature in relation to Abraham and Torok’s notions
of cryptonymy.

31. The postmodern
Since this book does not attempt to introduce different critical schools
or historical periods of literature, it might seem odd to include a chapter
on the postmodern. In the following pages, however, we wish to suggest
that this topic provides us with an invaluable set of terms for thinking about
literary and other cultural texts, that to a significant degree it involves ways of
thinking which are unavoidable in the twenty-first century.
The word ‘postmodern’ itself seems odd, paradoxically evoking what
is after (‘post’) the contemporary (‘modern’). How can something be after
the contemporary? In this respect, in as much as they are confronting the
importance of paradox in relation to the contemporary study of literature,
other chapters in this book are also dealing with the postmodern. But this
paradox of the time of the postmodern also points to the fact that, strictly
speaking, the postmodern should not be thought of as a term of periodiza-
tion: the postmodern challenges our thinking about time, challenges us to
see the present in the past, the future in the present, the present in a kind
of no-time.
No doubt all periodizing terms (the Renaissance, the early modern period,
the Romantic period, and so on) resist definition, but there is perhaps
something additionally resistant, peculiar and (for many) maddening about
the ‘postmodern’. Indeed, the postmodern appears to welcome and embrace
a thinking of itself in terms of multiplicity. It resists the totalizing gesture
of a metalanguage, the attempt to describe it as a set of coherent explan-
atory theories. Rather than trying to explain it in terms of a fixed philo-
sophical position or as a kind of knowledge, we shall instead present a
‘postmodern vocabulary’ in order to suggest its mobile, fragmented and
paradoxical nature.280 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
A postmodern vocabulary
Undecidability
Undecidability involves the impossibility of deciding between two or more
competing interpretations. As we point out in Chapter 20, classical logic is
founded on the law of non-contradiction: something cannot be both A and not
A at the same time. The postmodern gives particular emphasis to ways in
which this law may be productively questioned or suspended. A classical
example of this is the Cretan liar paradox. If someone says ‘I am a liar’, how can
we tell if that person is lying or not? The statement would seem to make him
both a liar and not a liar at the same time. Our ability to make a decision about
the validity of such a statement is, at least temporarily, suspended. According
to classical logic, the Cretan liar paradox is an isolated and particular instance
of a paradoxical statement. For the postmodern, by contrast, the suspension
of the law of non-contradiction is endemic. In the postmodern, all absolute
values – such as the traditional values of God, Truth, Reason, the Law and so
on – become sites of questioning, of rethinking, of new kinds of affirmation.
The postmodern, that is to say, does not simply reject the possibility of mak-
ing decisions. Rather, it gives new attention to the value of the undecidable.
What the new critics of the middle of the twentieth century called ambiguity or
paradox is now considered in terms of undecidability. The difference is that
for the new critics literary texts tended to exploit the polysemic potential of
language to create a unified whole in which ambiguity produced an enriching
of the text’s final unity. For postmodern critics, by contrast, undecidability
radically undermines the very principle of unity: these critics celebrate multi-
plicity, heterogeneity, difference. Undecidability splits the text, disorders it.
Undecidability dislodges the principle of a single final meaning in a literary
text. It haunts. As Derrida puts it, there is no decision, nor any kind of moral
or political responsibility, that is not haunted by the ‘experience and experi-
ment of the undecidable’ (Derrida 1988, 116).
A new enlightenment
Theorists of the postmodern are drawn into that exhilarating as well as terrify-
ing ‘play’ of a text thrown up by its forms of undecidability. For those nervous
of the postmodern, this is deemed to amount simply to nihilism and chaos.
But for postmodernists it is precisely those monolithic, unthinking assump-
tions about a fixed grounding for political, ethical and textual decisions that
lead to abhorrent results. It is the belief in a transcendent explanatory systemThe postmodern 281
– such as God, national identity or historical materialism, to name just three
– which leads to terror, persecution and oppression. In each case, there is a
transcendental value (God, the nation-state, a certain reading of the writings
of Marx) which can justify any excess. Postmodernists suggest that reason
itself has been used to justify all sorts of oppression. Reason may be said to lie
behind the Stalinist terror, for example, in the form of a rational or ‘scientific’
development of Marx’s thinking. Alternatively, in the science of eugenics,
‘rational’ argument or so-called empirical science helped to justify the Jewish
holocaust on grounds of racial difference. This is why, writing in 1944,
Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer argue that ‘Enlightenment is totalit-
arian’ (Horkheimer and Adorno 2002, 4). ‘Enlightenment’ here can be under-
stood very generally as a way of characterizing Western thought since the
seventeenth century. Very simply, the notion of the Enlightenment entails
the assertion of the power of reason over both superstition and nature, the
belief that a combination of abstract reason and empirical science will lead to
knowledge and eventually to political and social progress. By contrast, the
postmodern is sceptical about claims of progress in history, not least because
of the necessary marginalization (of the apparently non-progressive) which
it entails.
A common misunderstanding of the postmodern is that it involves simply
an assertion and celebration of the irrational. The postmodern can more
helpfully be understood, however, as a suspension and deconstructionof the
opposition between the rational and the irrational. Irrationalism in itself is
only another form of rationalism because it is dependent for its definition on
its opposite (only someone who is rational could conceive of someone or
something as irrationaland the irrational can only be defined in opposition to
the rational). The postmodern could be seen as concerned rather with what
Jacques Derrida calls ‘a new enlightenment’ (Derrida 1988, 141) concerned
to explore the value and importance of ways of thinking that cannot be
reduced to an opposition between the rational and the irrational.
Fragmentation, dissemination
Postmodern resistance to totalizing forces such as rationalism or irrationalism
means that its characteristic form is fragmentary. Fragmentation, in fact, is
commonly associated with the Romantic and modern periods: poems such as
Percy Bysshe Shelley’s ‘Ozymandias’ (1818) from the Romantic period and
T.S. Eliot’s The Waste Land(1922) from the modern period are crucially con-
cerned with the notion of the fragment. In this sense, fragmentation is not
unique to the postmodern. But the postmodern entails a new kind of critique282 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of the very ideas of fragment and totality. This has taken the form of, among
other things, a fundamental questioning of the notion of originality and corres-
pondingly a new kind of emphasis on citation and intertextuality, parody and
pastiche. In this respect, originality, which has been of particular importance
as an aesthetic value since the eighteenth century, is seen as a kind of ideo-
logical fetish, rather than the overriding criterion in aesthetic judgements.
Moreover, we might remark a significant difference between notions of
fragmentation in the postmodern and those in Romanticism and Modernism:
fragmentation in the postmodern does not depend on the possibility of an
original ‘unity’ which has been lost. The Romantics and Modernists, by con-
trast, tend to figure fragmentation in terms of the loss of an original wholeness.
Another way of thinking about postmodern fragmentation is in terms of
dissemination. Dissemination involves a sense of scattering (as in a scattering
of seeds or ‘semes’), a scattering of origins and ends, of identity, centre and
presence. Postmodern fragmentation is without origins, it is dissemination
without any assurance of a centre or destination.
Little and grand narratives
One of the best-known distinctions in the postmodern is that made by Jean-
François Lyotard concerning what he calls ‘grand’ narratives and ‘little’ nar-
ratives. ‘Grand narratives’ such as Christianity, Marxism, the Enlightenment
attempt to provide a framework for everything. Such narratives follow a
‘teleological’ movement towards a time of equality and justice: after the last
judgement, the revolution, or the scientific conquest of nature, injustice,
unreason and evil will end. Lyotard argues that the contemporary ‘world-
view’, by contrast, is characterized by ‘little narratives’. Contemporary
Western discourse is characteristically unstable, fragmented, dispersed – not
a world-viewat all. ‘Little narratives’ present local explanations of individual
events or phenomena but do not claim to explain everything. Little narratives
are fragmentary, non-totalizing and non-teleological. Lyotard claims that, in
the West, grand narratives have all but lost their efficacy, that their legitimacy
and their powers of legitimation have been dispersed. Legitimation is now
plural, local and contingent. No supreme authority – Marx, Hegel or God
– can sit in judgement. In his provocatively titled book The Gulf War Did Not
Take Place(1995), for example, Jean Baudrillard offers an analysis of the way
that the first Gulf War was as much a function of televisual and other media
representations as of anything else. Despite the controversial nature of his
title, Baudrillard is not so much suggesting that there was no war as that in
an unprecedented way its very actuality was and remains indissoluble from
media representations.The postmodern 283
The phenomenon described here has also been described by the phrase
‘legitimation crisis’, borrowed from the German thinker Jürgen Habermas.
Habermas uses this phrase to denote a situation in which all ‘master codes’ or
grand narratives, all conventions, institutions, final authorities have been put
into a state of crisis. And in the last century or so, the announcements of the
death of God, ‘man’ and the author have successively dramatized this dissolu-
tion of authority.
Simulation
The Western philosophical tradition of aesthetics has relied heavily on a
distinction between the real and its copy. This goes back at least as far as
Plato, who argued that painters, actors, dramatists and so on, all produce rep-
resentations or ‘imitations’ of the real world. (In fact, Plato argues that even a
bed is an imitation of the concept or idea of a bed, so that a picture of a bed
is a second-degree copy of an essential but unobtainable bed, the essence of
bedness.) This way of thinking has given rise to a hierarchical opposition
between the real and the copy. And the hierarchy corresponds to that of
nature and fabrication, or nature and artifice. The postmodern, however,
challenges such hierarchies and shows how the set of values associated with
these oppositions can be questioned. As the film Falling Down(1993) star-
ring Michael Douglas makes clear, the photograph of the hamburger in the
fast-food restaurant is infinitely superior to the rather sad and surprisingly
expensive artifact that you have just bought. Even nature, in this postmodern
reversal, is subject to improvement. To adopt Umberto Eco’s words, ‘tech-
nology can give us more reality than nature can’ (Eco 1993, 203). Films such
as The Truman Show (1998) and the Matrix trilogy (1999–2003) demon-
strate a postmodern fascination with the technologies of virtual reality. In
the first a man unwittingly lives his life in the fabricated studio world of a
24-hour-a-day soap opera, while in the second humankind has been enslaved
by robots who feed off their energy, keeping them subservient by plugging
them into a virtual world, the matrix.
Another way of thinking about this phenomenon is to use Jean Baudrillard’s
term ‘simulation’ (or ‘the simulacrum’). Simulation is contrasted with repre-
sentation. The latter works on the basis that there is a distinction between
what the linguist Ferdinand de Saussure calls the signifier and the signified,
between a word or ‘sound-image’, and the idea or the ‘mental concept’ that it
represents. In classical terms, there is an absolute distinction between the
word ‘hamburger’ and what that word represents. Similarly, common sense
tells us that there is a clear and necessary distinction between a photograph of
a hamburger and a hamburger. Simulation, by contrast, short-circuits such284 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
distinctions. Saturated by images – on computers, TV, advertising hoardings,
magazines, newspapers and so on – the ‘real’ becomes unthinkable without
the copy. In other words, simulation involves the disturbing idea that the copy
is not a copy of something real; the real is inextricable from the significance
and effects of the copy. That hamburger that looks so tempting is far more
delicious than any you could ever taste. But, paradoxically, when you taste
yourhamburger, you are at the same time tasting what is created by advertising
images of hamburgers. If Coke really is it, then it is because our experience of
drinking Coca-Cola cannot be disengaged from the seductive lifestyle images
of its advertising, from those insidious effects of the brand name, whereby
the desirability of a given product is in a sense brandedinto our consciousness
and unconscious. This leads to the world of what Jean Baudrillard calls the
hyperreal, in which reality is fabricated by technology. As Baudrillard puts
it: ‘simulation is no longer that of a territory, a referential being or substance. It
is the generation by models of a real without origin or reality; a hyperreal...
Henceforth it is the map that precedes the territory’ (Baudrillard 1988, 166).
Depthlessness
Another way of talking about simulation or the simulacrum is in terms of
depthlessness. If one governing opposition for Western thought has been
between the real and the copy, between nature and artifice, another has been
between surface and depth. An obvious example of this would be the notion of
‘expression’, which involves the idea that the words which we write or speak
expresssomething ‘inside’ our heads (thoughts and feelings). The words are the
surface, whereas our thoughts or consciousness represent depth. Similarly,
the idea of the self, the very possibility of being human, has conventionally
relied on such an opposition: the subject or self is constituted as a relation
between surface and depth, inside and outside.
Fredric Jameson provides a useful account of four depth models that, he
argues, have dominated the West in the twentieth century (Jameson 1993,
70):
1. Marxism: Marxism crucially depends on the notion of ideology. Put
simply, this involves the idea that we do not see the reality of the world
around us but only what we have been indoctrinated into seeing.
2. Psychoanalysis: Freud’s theories are based on the distinction between
the conscious and the unconscious, whereby the unconscious is held to
be the truth behind or beneath the distorted representation which we call
consciousness.The postmodern 285
3. Existentialism: in its various forms, existentialism relies on a distinction
between, on the one hand, authentic existence and, on the other hand,
inauthenticity: authenticity is the truth of selfhood underlying the dis-
tortions effected by a state of inauthenticity.
4. Semiotics: as we have seen, Saussurean notions of language presuppose a
distinction between the signifier on the one hand and the signified on the
other. The word or sound-image indicates an underlying idea or mental
concept.
In each case, the authentic or real is understood to be hidden or disguised,
while the surface phenomenon, the façade, is an inauthentic distortion or
arbitrary offshoot of the underlying truth. With the postmodern, all of these
surface–depth models are shaken up. The postmodern suspends, dislocates
and transforms the oppositional structures presupposed by major Western
modes of thought – by classical Marxism, psychoanalysis, existentialism,
semiotics.
Pastiche
Jameson also distinguishes between parody and pastiche. Both rely on imita-
tion of earlier texts or objects. In parody, there is an impulse to ridicule by
exaggerating the distance of the original text from ‘normal’ discourse. The
postmodern, however, no longer accepts the notion of ‘normal’ language:
pastiche is ‘blank’ parody in which there is no single model followed, no
single impulse such as ridicule and no sense of a distance from any norm
(see Jameson 1992, 166–7). Postmodern architecture, for example, borrows
elements from various earlier periods of architecture and puts them in
eclectic juxtaposition. In what the architectural critic Charles Jencks has
termed ‘radical eclecticism’ (Jencks 1993, 283), there is no single stable
reference. Similarly, a Madonna video parodies, for example, film noir,
Marilyn Monroe, contemporary pornography, avant-garde erotic art and
Catholic icons, in an apparently random dissonance of combination. Rather
differently, the music of contemporary ‘Bollywood’ films supplies a potent
mix of classical and folk music from the Indian subcontinent with the so-
called ‘Western’ rhythms and sounds of soul, jazz, rock’n’roll, pop, disco,
1970s blaxpoitation funk, trip hop, techno, ambient and house music. It
is just such a sense of eclecticism that distinguishes contemporary culture
for Lyotard:
Eclecticism is the degree zero of contemporary general culture: one listens
to reggae, watches a western, eats McDonald’s food for lunch and local286 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
cuisine for dinner, wears Paris perfume in Tokyo and retro clothes in Hong
Kong; knowledge is a matter for TV games. (Lyotard 1992, 145)
This hybridization, a radical intertexuality mixing forms, genres, conven-
tions, media, dissolves boundaries between high and low art, between the
serious and the ludic. Genre becomes explicitly unstable, especially in such
texts as Vladimir Nabokov’s Pale Fire(1963), which mixes up a poem with a
literary-critical analysis and political thriller, John Fowles’s The French
Lieutenant’s Woman(1969), which uses history textbooks to tell a love story,
D.M. Thomas’s The White Hotel(1981), which exploits the genres of poetry
and psychoanalytic case-study, or Dave Eggers’s A Heartbreaking Work of
Staggering Genius(2000), which infuriatingly resists our desire to categorize
it as either autobiography or novel (‘Based on a true story’, the book proclaims
on its cover). Two of the most creative and powerful television drama series
of the 1980s and early 1990s are exemplary in this respect: David Lynch’s
TwinPeaks(1990) mixes up the detective story with forms such as horror,
avant-garde or art-house movies, soap opera and so on, while Dennis Potter’s
The Singing Detective (1986) dissolves the borders between the detective
story, Hollywood musicals, psychological dramas and the Bildungsroman.
More recently, TV series such as The Office, Green Wing, The Hills, The
Sopranossimilarly take up and meddle with a plurality of styles, discourses,
genres.
The unpresentable
Since the postmodern challenges the distinction between mimesis or copy
and the real, it contests the modes of its own representation, of representation
itself. Thus it paradoxically defines itself in terms of liminal phenomena
which defy both categorization and, finally, expression – the unpresentable, or
in some of its other formulations, the sublime (Lyotard), the abject (Kristeva),
the unnamable (Beckett). Thus Samuel Beckett’s writing, for example, may
be said to be constituted by the paradoxical impossibility and necessity of
discourse – ‘I can’t go on, I’ll go on’ (The Unnamable, 418).
If in ‘going on’ there are no clear rules of representation, mimesis, tempor-
ality, then the artist is working within the terms of the radically undecidable,
or the yet to be decided, as Lyotard remarks:
The postmodern would be that which, in the modern, puts forward the
unpresentable in presentation itself: that which denies itself the solace of
good forms, the consensus of a taste which would make it possible to shareThe postmodern 287
collectively the nostalgia for the unattainable; that which searches for new
presentations, not in order to enjoy them but in order to impart a stronger
sense of the unpresentable...the artist and the writer, then, are working
without rules in order to formulate the rules of what will have been done.
Hence the fact that work and text have the characters of an event...Post
modernwould have to be understood according to the paradox of the future
(post) anterior (modo). (Lyotard 1992, 149–50)
The unpresentable is an effect, not least, of a disturbance of temporality, of the
linear progression of time. The postmodern is grammatically specified as
inhabiting the future perfect, what will have been. There is no pure present on
the basis of which re-presentation may take place.
Decentring
Everything that we have said in this chapter may be summarized in terms of
the notion of decentring. The postmodern challenges the ‘logo-centric’ (the
authority of the word, the possibility of final meanings or of being in the
presence of pure ‘sense’). It challenges the ethnocentric (the authority of
one ethnic ‘identity’ or culture – such as Europe or ‘the West’ or Islam or
Hinduism). It challenges the phallocentric (everything that privileges the
symbolic power and significance of the phallus and therefore of masculinity).
As Ihab Hassan remarks, the postmodern may be summarized by a list of
words prefixed by ‘de-’ and ‘di-’:
deconstruction, decentring, dissemination, dispersal, displacement, dif-
ference, discontinuity, demystification, delegitimation, disappearance.
(Hassan 1989, 309)
In place of the centre, but not in its place, there is alterity, otherness, a
multiplicity and dispersal of centres, origins, presences.
Further reading
An excellent introduction to postmodernism is Christopher Butler’s Post-
modernisn: A Very Short Introduction (2002). Good collections of essays
include Brooker’s Modernism/Postmodernism (1992), Docherty’s Post-
modernism(1993), and Drolet’s The Postmodernism Reader(2003); see also
Stuart Sim, ed., The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism(2004). Bertens
and Natoloi, eds, Postmodernism: The Key Figures (2001) provides useful
entries on the key thinkers. Lyotard’s The Postmodern Condition(1984) is, by288 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
now (paradoxically), a classic text to start with – ‘Answering the Question:
What is Postmodernism?’ (1992) is particularly useful. His more recent
Postmodern Fables(1997) offers a series of brief, elliptical and often enigmatic
essays on postmodern topics. Jameson’s ‘The Politics ofTheory’ (1988) and
Linda Hutcheon’s books APoetics of Postmodernism(1988) and The Politics
of Postmodernism (1989) provide strong, politicized accounts of the post-
modern. Steven Connor offers an excellent overview of the postmodern in his
Postmodernist Culture (1997); on literature in particular, see Ian Gregson,
Postmodern Literature (2004). For two accounts of the postmodern speci-
fically in the context of literary narrative and narrative theory, see Andrew
Gibson, Towards a Postmodern Theory of Narrative(1996) and Mark Currie,
Postmodern Narrative Theory(1998). Readings and Schaber, eds, Postmod-
ernism Across the Ages (1993) is a useful collection of essays which seek to
challenge the common assumption that postmodernism is a period term
referring to the current time.

32. Pleasure
Whether in a seminar or at the pub, often the first thing that gets asked
about a book is: Did you enjoy it? This is not just a way of making con-
versation, but also suggests the fundamental importance of pleasure when it
comes to reading. In fact, the question ‘Did you enjoy it?’, far from breaking the
ice and starting a passionate discussion, is generally followed by a terse ‘Yes’
or ‘No’ and then forgotten. We may talk about things we enjoy in a work of
literature – the gripping narrative, the appealing characters, the power of the
language, the comedy and pathos – but we do not very often talk about the
enjoyment itself, about what enjoyment or pleasure is. There are at least two
reasons for this. In the first place, pleasure, enjoyment, emotional and indeed
erotic excitement can be surprisingly difficult to talk about. Secondly, and no
doubt related to this, such pleasures tend to border on the transgressive, cen-
sored or taboo. But as we hope to show in the course of this chapter, pleasure
is crucial to, and even synonymous with, literature itself. This is perhaps why
Sir Philip Sidney declares that the purpose of poetry is ‘to teach and delight’
(Sidney 2002, 86) and why, in his 1802 Preface to Lyrical Ballads, William
Wordsworth uses the word ‘pleasure’ (and its cognates) more than 50 times,
proposing that the ‘end of poetry is to produce excitement in coexistence with
an overabundance of pleasure’ (Wordsworth 1984, 609). This is not to con-
strue the literary as ‘mere’ play, as simply hedonistic or self-indulgent. Instead
we will seek to describe a sense of pleasure and of literature that may be both
disconcerting and subversive.
Take a text that might seem relatively innocuous, a story called ‘Bliss’
(1920) by the New Zealand writer Katherine Mansfield. ‘Bliss’ concerns a
30-year-old woman called Bertha Young and her feelings of extreme pleasure
before and during a dinner-party at her home. She and her husband Harry290 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
entertain an erotically powerful blonde called Pearl Fulton, a ludicrous poet
called Eddie Warren and a more or less equally risible couple, Mr and Mrs
Norman Knight. Bertha is consistently described as feeling a ‘fire of bliss’
(311) inside her: ‘Everything was good – was right. All that happened seemed
to fill again her brimming cup of bliss’ (311). She is ‘as much in love as ever’
(308) with her husband, but she has also fallen in love with the beautiful Pearl
Fulton: ‘she always did fall in love with beautiful women who had something
strange about them’ (307). Whether it is the lovely appearance of the dinner
table or the blossoming pear tree which Bertha takes Pearl to look at from the
drawing-room balcony, everything helps to give Bertha the feeling of being
(like Keats in ‘Ode to a Nightingale’) ‘too happy’ (308). The story ends with
an excruciating moment of revelation, however, as Bertha inadvertently dis-
covers that her husband and Pearl Fulton are lovers: unaware that Bertha can
see them, the couple exchange intimacies in the hall. Bertha’s feelings of bliss
are finally, brutally effaced.
This is how ‘Bliss’ begins:
Although Bertha Young was thirty she still had moments like this when she
wanted to run instead of walk, to take dancing steps on and off the pave-
ment, to bowl a hoop, to throw something up in the air and catch it again, or
to stand still and laugh at – nothing – at nothing, simply.
What can you do if you are thirty and, turning the corner of your own
street, you are overcome, suddenly, by a feeling of bliss – absolute bliss! –
as though you’d suddenly swallowed a bright piece of that late afternoon
sun and it burned in your bosom, sending out a little shower of sparks into
every particle, into every finger and toe? (305)
Bertha can scarcely contain herself, she is overcome by such a feeling of bliss
that she does not know what to do. The passage suggests a number of
significant things about the nature of pleasure. First, there is an evocation of
laughter which may complement some of the remarks we make about laughter
in Chapter 12: Bertha wants ‘to stand still and laugh at – nothing – at nothing,
simply’. Laughter, the desire to laugh, is one manifestation of Bertha’s feelings
of extreme pleasure or ‘bliss’. But more precisely laughter is identified with a
sense of ‘nothing, simply’. We may recall here Georges Bataille’s remark:
‘[when I laugh,] I am in fact nothing other than the laughter which takes hold
of me’ (Bataille 1973, 364). There is, for Bertha, the desire to laugh but a
desire for laughter that would be ‘at nothing’, a sense of laughter as pointless,
as itself nothing.
Second, and related to this, there is the sense of bliss (like the force of
uncontrollable laughter) as something by which a subject – Bertha Young – isPleasure 291
‘overcome’. The subject is no longer in control, but rather is in danger of
shattering, as if into a ‘shower of sparks’. Third, the passage suggests a strik-
ing correlation between ‘bliss’ and the inexpressible. The language of the
extract resorts to the metaphorical, figurative and paradoxical (it was ‘as
thoughyou’d suddenly swallowed a bright piece of that late afternoon sun’)
precisely because it would appear that there is no other way of describing this
‘feeling of bliss’. This feeling of bliss is like having a foreign body inside you
(as if you’d suddenly swallowed a piece of the sun): it’s alien to yourself but
burning inside you. Fourth, and leading on from this, there is the suggestion
that pleasure can be painful at the same time: the burning bosom here might be
compared with the ‘aching Pleasure’ evoked in Keats’s ‘Ode on Melancholy’.
Finally, and perhaps most crucially, the passage draws the reader into the
experience that is being described. It intimates a subtle kind of performative
(see Chapter 27), that is to say we can think about the passage as not only
describing something but also doing something. Pleasure, up to and perhaps
even beyond the extreme form of pleasure to which the narrator gives the
name ‘bliss’, is not just a topic or theme inthe text: it also isthe text, it is the
title of the text and it is a potential effect of reading. The text draws us into
a sense of what Wordsworth refers to when he declares, of his experience of
the first days of the French Revolution, in The Prelude: ‘Bliss was it in that
dawn to be alive’ (Book XI, 108). Through its evocations of the loveliness
of the world (a blue dish, a pear tree in blossom), Mansfield’s story affirms
and calls on us to affirm the inexpressible pleasures of being alive: it evokes a
revolution in sensibility. It also gives us the pleasure of reading as romance,
reading about romance, about the subtleties of erotic feelings between people.
It gives us the pleasures of identification, irony, suspense and social satire.
And ‘Bliss’ gives us all of these things in language: the experience of pleasure
is an experience of words, a pleasure in words, even as it points towards a sense
of pleasure that is inexpressible, beyond words.
The pleasure of reading ‘Bliss’ starts with the deceptive simplicity of its
narrative perspective. We are confronted here with an apparently omniscient
or telepathic narrator who is capable of inhabiting the mind, body and feel-
ings of the protagonist. This is what narrative theorists call ‘free indirect
discourse’, in which we are presented with a voice practising impersonation
or ventriloquism, a voice that is undecidably both the narrator’s and the
character’s. Bertha Young’s thoughts and feelings are conveyed not only
through a third-person narration (‘she still had moments’, ‘she wanted to
run’) but also, in the second paragraph of the extract, in the second-person
(‘you are overcome’). This is unusual – though an important characteristic
of Mansfield’s work generally – and strangely insidious: the ‘you’, after all, may292 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
not finally stop short of you, the reader. The subtle, almost imperceptible way
in which the text draws us into the experience of what is being described can
be illustrated in the very opening words of the story: ‘Although Bertha Young
was thirty she still had moments like this.’ The word ‘this’ seems to call on the
reader to acknowledge or accept something already evident, already pre-
sented to her or him. Discreetly, deftly, it draws the reader into the immediate
here and now of the experience of bliss.
Another aspect of the pleasure of Mansfield’s story has to do with its cre-
ation of irony and suspense. The text works through suspense, through the
pleasure of suspension and an ominous suspension of pleasure. For while
the narrative perspective invites us to identify with Bertha and her feelings
of bliss, the text also generates other, more specifically readerly kinds of
pleasure. Bertha’s feelings of ‘bliss’, for example, are at various moments
represented in ironic terms. The reader is given a strong sense that – despite
the repeated evocations of the ‘fire of bliss’, the incredible beauty of the
table, the pear tree and so on – Bertha Young may have a rather limited experi-
ence of bliss, especially in sexual terms. Near the end of the story we are told
that, as people are about to start leaving the party, ‘For the first time in her life
Bertha Young desired her husband’ (314). Bliss in this case seems to have
been postponed. The reader takes pleasure, then, in being able to identify
with the protagonist but to experience at the same time a sense of ironic
detachment. Above all, the reader’s pleasure is generated by the pervasive
sense that something is going to happen, that the narrator knows something
(and soon perhaps the reader will know something too) which fundamentally
complicates Bertha’s feelings of ‘bliss’. Bliss, then, seems to involve a state of
suspension – for Bertha, for the reader and, differently, for the very structure
of narration.
On this basis we can perhaps formulate one or two more general pro-
positions about pleasure and literature. Literature is about the possibilities of
pleasure. It is about the idea that readerly pleasure is erotic. Literature is erotic
(even if it is not literally concerned with erotic or sexual topics or themes)
because it is always concerned with seducing the reader. Literary texts can
seduce us, or, put more strongly, they need to seduce us. In a sense there is no
reason to read a literary text, it serves no purpose, has no function. And this
is why, as Ross Chambers has argued, in his book Story and Situation:
Narrative Seduction and the Power of Fiction(1984), the essential ‘power’ of a
literary text is its power of seduction. In particular, literary seduction has to
do with identification (the reader’s identification with a character, narrator,
author or situation), with a sense of intrigue, mystery or secrecy (what is this
text about? Is it, in fact, about something different from what it appears to bePleasure 293
about? What designs does it have on me?), and with the beauty of language
(elegance of expression, lyricism, wit, poignant or provoking metaphors, and
so on). Finally, a literary text can seduce us through a logic of what Freud calls
‘disavowal’. Disavowal involves the situation in which someone knows that
such and such is not true but nevertheless thinks, speaks or acts as if it is true.
Disavowal involves thinking: ‘I know, but still...’ The process of disavowal
whereby we can be seduced into the world of literature, into fictional worlds,
has been neatly phrased by Roland Barthes in his book, The Pleasure of the
Text(1973): the reader disavows, in other words he or she keeps thinking, ‘I
know these are only words, but allthe same...’ (Barthes 1990a, 47). The logic
of disavowal perhaps offers a more precise way of thinking about how we read
works of literature than Coleridge’s famous idea of a ‘willing suspension of
disbelief’ (Coleridge 1975, 169): the notion of disavowal more dramatically
highlights the contradictoriness of what is going on in the act of reading. The
work of the text, its task of seduction, is to ensure this disavowal, to put the
reader into this state of what is at once ‘truth’ and ‘fiction’.
This principle of disavowal – of reading a work of fiction as though it were
not only words – permits us to suggest a way of distinguishing between litera-
ture and pornography. Both have a capacity for erotic and sexual stimulation
but the difference between them could be said to consist in the fact that a liter-
ary work does not allow the reader to forget the process by which he or she is
being seduced, whereas pornography calls for the abolition of the ‘as though’
altogether. In other words, pornography entails what John Forrester (follow-
ing Jean Baudrillard) describes as ‘a fantasy of a real in which representation
does not exist, i.e. a real without seduction’ (Forrester 1990, 332). Katherine
Mansfield’s ‘Bliss’ is not likely to be classified as pornography; but it is
certainly about erotic and sexual feelings – both in what it tells and in its telling.
More particularly, the story explores some of the limits of pleasure: it dramat-
izes the ways in which pleasure is concerned with strangeness (the nothing-
ness of laughter), paradox (the inarticulable) and contradiction (disavowal).
Fundamental to this is what Mansfield’s text suggests about the curious tem-
porality of pleasure. To recall the opening words once more: ‘Although Bertha
Young was thirty she still had moments like this when she wanted to run
instead of walk, to take dancing steps on and off the pavement, to bowl a hoop,
to throw something up in the air and catch it again, or to stand still and laugh
at – nothing – at nothing, simply.’ This sentence is set in the past tense, but
the ‘this’ (‘moments like this’) suggests something immediate, here and now.
In fact, the time of ‘this’ is uncertain and strange: it is as if the present of
‘moments like this’ is already gone. ‘Moments like this’ are presented in the
past tense in such a way as to suggest that they are already ‘moments like that’294 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
or ‘moments like those’. The ambiguity of the this-ness of ‘this’ is com-
pounded by multiplicity: Bertha wanted to run, to dance, to bowl a hoop, to
throw and catch something, to stand still and laugh. Are these all different
moments or are they different ways of figuring one single moment (‘moments
like this [one]’)? The sense of time, in the context of extreme pleasure or
‘bliss’, seems to involve an undecidable, uncontainable multiplicity. Time
cannot contain itself when it comes to bliss.
Katherine Mansfield’s special focus on moments of intense feeling belongs
to a specific historical context and in particular to the literary and cultural
aftermath of late nineteenth-century aestheticism. This is to suggest that
pleasure and bliss can be thought about in historical terms: they are experi-
enced and represented differently at different times. A full-scale account of
the aestheticism associated with such figures as Walter Pater, Oscar Wilde,
Algernon Swinburne, Aubrey Beardsley and others need not detain us here.
Its principal concerns were with the idea of art for art’s sake, beauty as truth,
and the appeal of the moment for the moment’s sake (there is no past, no
future, only the present moment). In the late nineteenth century the aesthetes
made of pleasure a philosophy, a moral creed, a way of being. At the heart of
aestheticism is a focus on the beauty and power of the moment. It is concerned
with the experience and expression of the intense pleasure of the present. The
most succinct and eloquent text for an understanding of aestheticism is Walter
Pater’s Conclusion to his book The Renaissance (1873). This Conclusion,
only a few pages in length, offers us a way of understanding the work of many
modernist writers, including Joseph Conrad, James Joyce, D.H. Lawrence,
Virginia Woolf, Elizabeth Bowen, Ezra Pound, Wallace Stevens, T.S. Eliot
and Mansfield herself. All of these writers are singularly concerned with
the power of particular moments. On the one hand, they are concerned with
exploring a sense that the only time of anyfeeling or experience (painful or
pleasurable) is right now, this very moment now. On the other hand, however,
these writers are concerned with showing that even the present moment is
already a ghost of itself. In the Conclusion to The Renaissance, Pater puts
this concisely when he describes the present moment as ‘gone while we try to
apprehend it’. The present moment is that ‘of which it may ever be more truly
said that it has ceased to be than that it is’ (196). Pater’s Conclusion urges us to
make the most of the ecstatic and passionate possibilities of experience, given
the ‘awful brevity’ of our lives: life is defined as ‘this short day of frost and sun’
(197) and (one of the things that made Pater’s text quite scandalous at the time
of its first publication) there is no sense of any afterlife or consolations beyond
the grave. Here is the conclusion to Pater’s Conclusion:Pleasure 295
our one chance lies in expanding that interval [i.e. life], in getting as many
pulsations as possible into the given time. Great passions may give us this
quickened sense of life, ecstasy and sorrow of love, the various forms of
enthusiastic activity, disinterested or otherwise, which come naturally to
many of us. Only be sure it is passion – that it does yield you this fruit of a
quickened, multiplied consciousness. Of such wisdom, the poetic passion,
the desire of beauty, the love of art for its own sake, has most. For art comes
to you proposing frankly to give nothing but the highest quality to your
moments as they pass, and simply for those moments’ sake. (198–9)
Pater’s unprecedented emphasis on the present moment played a crucial
role in the development of aestheticism in Britain, the United States and
elsewhere. It haunts modernist writing in turn – whether in the form of
epiphanies (in James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Manfor ex-
ample), or of what Virginia Woolf famously refers to as ‘moments of being’,
or of what Mansfield, at the start of ‘Bliss’, refers to as ‘moments like this’. All
of these writers in their different ways are concerned with the uncontainable,
delirious, ecstatic, inexpressible quality of individual moments, of time as
(only) now. It is not simply a question of a ‘carpe diem’ (‘seize the day’) motifin
modern literature. Rather, it is a matter of how the present moment resists any
attempt to appropriate or ‘seize’ it. It is a matter of how moments of extreme
pleasure (including orgasm) are at the same time moments of loss: such
moments involve, indeed, a kind of dissolution and more generally suggest a
sense of experience in terms of what Pater calls ‘that continual vanishing away,
that strange, perpetual weaving and unweaving of ourselves’ (196).
In other words, as Mansfield’s story suggests, pleasure can be thought
about in terms of a subversion of identity. It is for this reason, among others,
that it is not possible to say that the kinds of pleasures with which this chapter
is concerned are simply hedonistic. Nor can one say that the kind of thinking
and experience valued by Pater constitutes mere self-indulgence or a con-
temptible neglect of political and social realities. As a way of illustrating this
we will focus on what is perhaps the most important and most pleasurable
work on the topic of pleasure and literature in recent years, Roland Barthes’s
The Pleasure of the Text. Barthes stresses that ‘hedonism has been repressed
by nearly every philosophy’ (Barthes 1990a, 57) and he is at pleasurable
pains to argue against such repression. The value and originality of his study
consists not in the politically suspect project of advocating hedonism in a
traditional sense but rather in the critical delineation of the paradoxes of
pleasure, specifically in the experience of reading. Barthes offers a sort of
critical anatomy of pleasure in reading. In particular, he distinguishes between296 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
two sorts of pleasure: pleasure of the ‘comfortable’ sort and pleasure of a
more disturbing and subversive kind. Barthes writes:
Text of pleasure: the text that contents, fills, grants euphoria; the text that
comes from culture and does not break with it, is linked to a comfortable
practice of reading. Text of bliss: the text that imposes a state of loss, the
text that discomforts (perhaps to the point of a certain boredom), unsettles
the reader’s historical, cultural, psychological assumptions, the con-
sistency of his tastes, values, memories, brings to a crisis his relation with
language. (14)
Barthes’s book suggests, then, that there are two ways in which we could think
about pleasure. One is basically recuperative: it does not break with culture
but rather reinforces traditional or comfortable notions of meaning, society,
ideology, etc. The other sense of pleasure (‘bliss’) is more unsettling and
strange. No doubt all literary and other cultural texts are susceptible to being
read in both of these ways. Barthes’s own emphasis, however, falls on ‘bliss’
(‘jouissance’ in French). ‘Bliss’ has to do with the inexpressible: ‘pleasure can
be expressed in words, bliss cannot’ (21). Bliss has to do with a deconstruc-
tion of the political: it is thus engaged in ‘de-politicizing what is apparently
political, and in politicizing what apparently is not’ (44). Or as Barthes puts
it: ‘The text is (should be) that uninhibited person who shows his behind
to the Political Father’ (53). Above all, bliss has to do with the subversion of
identity itself. As with the uncontrollable force of laughter or the moment of
orgasm, the extreme pleasure of bliss involves a collapse of self, a (momentary)
dissolution of identity. The subject is thus ‘never anything but a “living con-
tradiction”: a split subject, who simultaneously enjoys, through the text, the
consistency of his selfhood and its collapse, its fall’ (21).
By way of conclusion, we would like to suggest that – while Barthes refers to
the reader as ‘he’ – the ‘living contradiction’ he describes may be thought
about as, in the final analysis, undecidably gendered. Partly what makes
Barthes’s work unusual and challenging is that it explicitly centres on the
importance of ‘emotion’, defining this as ‘a disturbance, a bordering on
collapse’ (25). For Barthes, we could say, the pleasure of reading inevitably
involves ‘getting hysterical’. But the collapse of selfhood, the shattering force
of bliss which he talks about, is a collapse in which it is no longer clear whether
there is a subject, or what gender it might belong to. Mansfield’s story can also
be considered in these terms. Insofar as it is a text about ‘women and hysteria’,
it suggests that ‘getting hysterical’ (306) is just as much a male as a female ten-
dency. ‘Bliss’, that is to say, is as much about male hysteria as it is about female
hysteria. This is evident, in particular, in Mansfield’s characterization ofPleasure 297
Eddie Warren, the poet who is ‘(as usual) in a state of acute distress’, and
whose first words, frenetically peppered with italics, provide a hysterical
account of his journey to the Youngs’:
‘I have had such a dreadfulexperience with a taxi-man; he was mostsinister.
I couldn’t get him to stop. The moreI knocked and called the fasterhe went.
And inthe moonlight this bizarrefigure with the flattenedhead crouching
over the lit-tlewheel...’ (309)
But it is also evident in Mansfield’s characterization of Bertha’s husband
Harry, who is one moment ‘rush[ing] into battle where no battle was’ (310)
and at others ‘extravagantly [i.e. hysterically] cool and collected’ (310, 315).
More radically, however, ‘Bliss’ is a story about the condition of ‘living con-
tradiction’ which Barthes evokes. It suggests that that extreme of pleasure
called ‘bliss’ is our undoing, including the undoing of gender-identity.
The story concludes with Harry locking up and Bertha recalling Pearl
Fulton’s final words to her (‘Your lovely pear tree!’):
And then she was gone, with Eddie following, like the black cat
following the grey cat.
‘I’ll shut up shop,’ said Harry, extravagantly cool and collected.
‘Your lovely pear tree—pear tree—pear tree!’
Bertha simply ran over to the long windows.
‘Oh, what is going to happen now?’ she cried.
But the pear tree was as lovely as ever and as full of flower and as
still. (315)
‘Bliss’ ends with this ‘still’. It leaves the question of bliss itself in suspense,
inexpressible, unbearable. As Barthes remarks: ‘Pleasure’s force of suspension
can never be overstated’ (Barthes 1990a, 65). Pleasure remains resistant and
enigmatic, like ‘literature’. The pleasure of literature is perhaps less to do
with the fact that it ‘holds a mirror up to nature’, offering a reflection of ‘life’,
and more to do with an experience of ‘living contradiction’ – with what
suspends or momentarily shatters our sense of ourselves. It is subversive,
finally, in suggesting that nothing is obvious, that, as Stephen Melville puts it:
‘nothing is obvious either in advance or after the fact’ (Melville 1986, xxvi).
Further reading
For a contemporary classic account, see Michel Foucault’s The Use ofPleasure
(The History of Sexuality, vol. 2, 1985). On pleasure and reading in general,298 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
see Roland Barthes’s The Pleasure of the Text (1990a). For reading and
seduction, Ross Chambers’s Story and Situation: Narrative Seduction and
the Power of Fiction (1984) is a fascinating and quite accessible work. Jean
Baudrillard’s Seduction (1990) is an important study but difficult. On the
power of the moment in modern literature a good place to start is Morris
Beja’s clear and very readable Epiphany in the Modern Novel(1971). For an
advanced study of pleasure and self, see Carolyn J. Dean’s The Self and Its
Pleasures (1992). On literature and the gendering of hysteria, see Elaine
Showalter’s fine essay ‘On Hysterical Narrative’ (1993). For a useful collec-
tion of essays on pleasure in relation to cultural studies, see Stephen Regan,
ed., The Politics of Pleasure(1992). On the politics of enjoyment, in particular
regarding enjoyment as something ordered, imposed or ‘superegotistical’, see
Slavoj oikek, For They Know Not What They Do: Enjoyment as a Political
Factor(1991).

33. War
Here’s a poem that you probably won’t like very much:
I
Half a league, half a league,
Half a league onward,
All in the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
5 ‘Forward, the Light Brigade!
Charge for the guns!’ he said:
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
II
‘Forward, the Light Brigade!’
10 Was there a man dismayed?
Not though the soldier knew
Some one had blundered:
Theirs not to make reply,
Theirs not to reason why,
15 Theirs but to do and die:
Into the valley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
III
Cannon to the right of them,
Cannon to the left of them,
20 Cannon in front of them
Volleyed and thundered;300 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Stormed at with shot and shell,
Boldly they rode and well,
Into the jaws of Death,
25 Into the mouths of hell
Rode the six hundred.
IV
Flashed all their sabres bare,
Flashed as they turned in air
Sabring the gunner there,
30 Charging an army, while
All the world wondered:
Plunged in the battery-smoke
Right through the line they broke;
Cossack and Russian
35 Reeled from the sabre-stroke
Shattered and sundered.
Then they rode back, but not
Not the six hundred.
V
Cannon to the right of them,
40 Cannon to the left of them,
Cannon behind them
Volleyed and thundered;
Stormed at with shot and shell,
While horse and hero fell,
45 They that had fought so well
Came through the jaws of Death
Back from the mouth of hell,
All that was left of them,
Left of the six hundred.
VI
50 When can their glory fade?
O the wild charge they made!
All the world wondered.
Honour the charge they made!
Honour the Light Brigade,
55 Noble six hundred!
The poem recounts an incident from the Crimean War (1854–6): after a
‘blunder’ by an officer, 673 lightly-armed British cavalrymen charged the
Russian artillery, resulting in about 400 British casualties. ‘The Charge ofWar 301
the Light Brigade’ was written on 2 December 1854 by Alfred Tennyson,
the poet laureate – ‘in a few minutes’, he says, after reading a report of the
incident in the Times newspaper. It is a famous poem that is invariably
included in anthologies, so you’ll probably know it or know of it. If you had
gone to an English school in the early twentieth century you might well have
been made to memorize and recite it. But what is it about the poem that you
(probably) don’t like and indeed that you may disapprove of? There are two
things in particular. First, there are its militaristic repetitions and rhythms.
This means that, despite its intricately varied form, the poem can seem some-
what crude or unsophisticated. And the formal, public nature of the poem
might seem a little dated as well – just the kind of thing you might expect of a
nineteenth-century poet laureate. Second, there is the sentiment that under-
lies the poem: it seems unreservedly to celebrate warfare, heroism, and per-
haps above all an unthinking and unquestioning adherence to one’s duty.
Tennyson’s poem seems to glorify the actions of those compatriots who
fight and die in war, even – or especially – in the context of a futile, misguided,
suicidal military manoeuvre. Someone has blundered, but the poem is not
particularly interested in who that might be, or in holding anyone responsible
for the error. Instead, Tennyson simply seeks to praise the soldierly virtues
of those who carried out orders. For these reasons, the poem has come to
seem (as one critic puts it) ‘mildly ludicrous, slightly contemptible’ (McGann
1985, 190–1).
You’ll probably like Wilfred Owen’s ‘Futility’ rather better:
Move him into the sun –
Gently its touch awoke him once,
At home, whispering of fields half-sown.
Always it woke him, even in France,
5 Until this morning and this snow.
If anything might rouse him now
The kind old sun will know.
Think how it wakes the seeds –
Woke once the clays of a cold star.
10 Are limbs, so dear achieved, are sides
Full-nerved, still warm, too hard to stir?
Was it for this the clay grew tall?
– O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
To break earth’s sleep at all?
This First World War poem was written in May 1918 and published posthu-
mously in 1920. It gradually becomes clear that the ‘him’ of the first line is in302 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
fact a dead soldier. Like Tennyson’s poem, Owen’s is very well known and like
Tennyson’s it focuses on a futile death. Like Tennyson’s, Owen’s is a poem of
commemoration or mourning. In other respects, though, ‘Futility’ seems very
different. It takes the form of an intimately personal, even private lyric,
expressing the sadness of an individual (a soldier, rather than a civilian news-
paper reader, we might surmise from the intimacy and directness of the
poem). This contrasts with Tennyson’s more detached, formal and public
expression of pride, a kind of triumphant mourning. For Owen, as he
famously said in a planned Preface to his poems, the poetry ‘is in the pity’
(Owen 1985, 192). In its own way, Owen’s poem is just as much a piece of pro-
paganda as Tennyson’s jingoistic ballad. It is a matter of anti-war propaganda
in this case – though it has been read by some critics as being, in its nostalgic
evocation of ‘home’, a kind of pro-British propaganda (see for example Pittock
2001). ‘Futility’ works as public propaganda through its very privateness. It
works as propaganda by appearing not to. Only at the very end of the poem
does it become evident why it is called ‘Futility’. The poem involves an almost
abstract meditation on the futility of war, moving from the expression of
mourning for an individual soldier to the question of the futility of human life.
It shifts from curiously muted imperatives (‘move him’, ‘Think how’) to a
series of plangently rhetorical questions. There is no narrative beyond this
movement of the speaker’s thoughts and we know next to nothing about the
individual who died, an individual who in fact seems to stand (in a kind of
synecdoche) for the many others, many British at least, who died in the First
World War. The poem’s form itself disavows any suggestion of militarism or of
the celebration of battle: the subtly varied rhymes and half-rhymes (‘sun’,
‘once’, ‘half-sown’, ‘France’, ‘snow’, ‘now’, ‘know’) and the gently tripping
rhythm (‘Think how it wakes the seeds – / Woke once the clays of a cold star’)
themselves abrogate the strident uniformity of militarism. Even nationalism
is subdued to a longing for English fields. The poem won’t march in step, so
to speak.
We think you’ll like Owen’s poem more than Tennyson’s (though we might
be wrong, of course, especially if you have the military in mind as a career
option). In other words, we imagine you will be more inclined to assent to
Owen’s understated critique of war and militarism. It is easier to identify
with the quiet, meditative, lyric poise of its individualized elegiac voice,
its anti-militaristic rhythms. Such a preference would be in keeping with a
more general change in literary and cultural taste over the last 150 years, espe-
cially in the wake of two world wars, the American trauma of Vietnam, and
what many see as the disasters of the US and British invasions of Afghanistan
and Iraq. The public, nationalistic celebration of military heroism of theWar 303
nineteenth century has given way to a more contemporary appreciation of
the significance of private sorrow and a resistance to the futility of war, any
war, all war.
But things were not always so. Literature begins with war, with the rage of
war. Menis: wrath, fury, rage. The first word of the first great poem in the
Western literary tradition, Homer’s Iliad (c. 700 BC), declares its topic:
menis, the rage of Achilles. The Western tradition, in other words, starts up
in rage and blood, the rage for war, the rage for rage – godlike, swift-footed,
murderous Achilles’ rage:
Rage – Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus’ son Achilles,
murderous, doomed, that cost the Achaeans countless losses,
hurling down to the House of Death so many sturdy souls,
great fighters’ souls, but made the bodies carrion,
feasts for the dogs and birds,
and the will of Zeus was moving towards its end.
Begin, Muse, when the two first broke and clashed,
Agamemnon lord of men and brilliant Achilles.
(Homer 1990: Book 1, lines 1–8)
What is striking about such a beginning, and about Homer’s poem as a whole,
is its keen enthusiasm for war, a celebration of war that is joined with loud
regret for its murderous, bloody losses. The poet calls on the goddess, his
muse, to ‘sing the rage’ of Achilles, attempting to summon up poetry that will
itself be warrior-like, belligerent. Homer’s narrative is driven by its tale of
war, just as its readers are, and at the same time it is sickened by its own viol-
ence, just as its readers are. The language itself, in Robert Fagles’s evocative
translation, has a belligerence that is at once appalling, and appalled. Here,
even at the very start of the Western literary tradition, there is a sense that war
is all, that war is total and never ending. The Iliadis thoroughly immersed
in warfare, with up to half of its 17,000 lines concerned with battles. Its set-
piece battle-scenes and intricate, bloody evocations of hand-to-hand fighting
make the Iliadseem like a multiplex conflation of Bridge Over the River Kwai,
Star Wars, Apocalypse Now, Saving Private Ryan, and Fight Club – but in
the hexameters of Homeric Greek verse rather than as a Dolby-enhanced
cinematic experience. The opening to the Iliadtakes place in the tenth year
of the Achaean siege of Troy, and the sense that the war might never end is
voiced early on by Agamemnon: ‘We are still fighting it, / no end in sight’
(Book 2, lines 142–3). Indeed, the end of Homer’s poem is not the end of
the war: victory and defeat are still looming. We leave, we are left, at the end304 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
of the Iliad, with the death of Hector, the Trojan leader. ‘The Iliadis a poem
that lives and moves and has its being in war’, comments the classical scholar
Bernard Knox, ‘in that world of organized violence in which a man justifies
his existence most clearly by killing others’ (Homer 1990, 35). This war,
Homer’s war, is a war without end.
Amazingly, for much of the twentieth century the Iliadwas read as anything
but a war poem (see Tatum 2003, 49–50). In his classic study of the poem
Tradition and Design in the ‘Iliad’(1930), for example, Maurice Bowra ana-
lyses it as a ‘profoundly moral story’ that is ‘tragic in character’ (26). Why is
it that a poem about a war has systematically been read differently, as if it
was ‘really’ about something else, not about war at all? It may be that the
answer has to do with the poem’s obsessive focus on the very stuff of war, on
rage, violence, blood and bodies in pieces, and with our desire to think of
poetry in other terms, as celebrating other virtues, less polemical kinds of
thinking. It may at least partly be explained, in other words, by the delight
that the poem takes in gore, savagery, rage, violence. Here are some samples
from Book 16, if you can stomach them:
Brave Patroclus first –
just as Areilycus swerved in sudden flight
he gored him in the hip with a slashing spear
and the bronze lancehead hammered through his flesh,
the shaft splintering bone as he pitched face-first,
pounding the ground –
And the veteran Menelaus wounded Thoas,
raking his chest where the shield-rim left it bare,
and loosed his limbs –
And Amphiclus went for Meges
but Meges saw him coming and got in first by far,
spearing him up the thigh where it joins the body,
the point where a man’s muscle bunches thickest:
the tough sinews shredded around the weapon’s point
as the dark swirled down his eyes –
...
Idomeneus skewered Erymas straight through the mouth,
the merciless brazen spearpoint raking through,
up under the brain to split his glistening skull –
teeth shattered out, both eyes brimmed to the lids
with a gush of blood and both nostrils spurting,
mouth gaping, blowing convulsive sprays of blood
and death’s dark cloud closed down around his corpse.
(Homer 1990, Book 16, lines 362–74, 407–13)War 305
In this respect, Homer’s poem is the equivalent not of the sanitized violence
of a Hollywood war movie, nor even of the discreetly edited images from
‘war torn’ countries that are beamed into your sitting room by CNN or the
BBC, but of Goya’s shocking images of the Spanish War of Independence
in Disasters of War (1810–14): bodies in pieces, bodies hacked, sliced,
torn apart, decapitated, dismembered, disembowelled. Homer’s words, like
Goya’s pictures, are grotesque in their realism, appalling in their unflinching,
even zealous, recording of human suffering, in their representation of people
violently objectified as violated, hacked and pierced bodies.
So what is a war poem presenting us with? What are Homer, Tennyson
and Owen commemorating? To what are they testifying or bearing witness?
The question of commemoration and testimony, of poetry as bearing witness
and the associated questions of trauma and trauma theory, have become
important dimensions of literary studies in the past decade or so, both in
relation to cultural representations of war and, more especially, in relation
to Holocaust studies. ‘How is the act of writingtied up with the act of bear-
ing witness?’ asks Shoshana Felman in Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in
Literature, Psychoanalysis, and History(1992). ‘Is the act of readingliterary
texts itself inherently related to the act of facing horror?’ she ponders (2).
Writing of Claude Lanzmann’s film Shoah(1985), a film of first-hand testi-
monies by witnesses of – mostly victims of – the Holocaust, Felman defines our
era as an ‘age of testimony’, one in which witnessing itself ‘has undergone
a major trauma’. Lanzmann’s film, Felman argues, presents ‘a historical crisis
of witnessing’ out of which witnessing becomes ‘in all senses of the word, a
critical activity’ (Felman 1992, 206). For Felman, this ‘crisis’ involves the
sense that bearing witness to something of such unimaginable horror as the
Holocaust puts the act of witnessing itself under extreme pressure. Susan
Gubar expresses at least part of the difficulty in the subtitle to her recent
book Poetry After Auschwitz: Remembering What One Never Knew (2003):
the problem of testimony in the context of the Holocaust has to do with the
difficulty of fully or properly ‘knowing’ what has been witnessed, even by
those most directly involved as victims – or indeed as persecutors.
But the crisis of witnessing also involves the idea that, as Jacques Derrida
puts it, testimony ‘always goes hand in hand with at least the possibility of
fiction, perjury, lie’ (Derrida 2000, 27). As Derrida makes clear, this is not
to say that all testimony is fiction, perjury, lie, not to dissolve the crucial dis-
tinction between truth and lie, truth and fiction, but to suggest nevertheless
that they are inextricably linked. This is evident, not least, from the writings of
the Holocaust, writings by victims and witnesses such as Primo Levi, who
themselves struggle to make sense, to form narratives, out of their experiences,306 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
to piece their experiences together into coherent shapes. Levi’s If This Is
A Man(published in the USA as Survival in Auschwitz) (1958) is an extraor-
dinary account of his time in Auschwitz – ‘Auschwitz, anus mundi, ultimate
drainage site of the German universe’, as he calls it (Levi 1989, 65). Explain-
ing the ‘fragmentary character’ of the book, Levi recounts that, at the time, the
need to tell his story involved ‘an immediate and violent impulse, to the point
of competing with...other elementary needs’. The shaping of these frag-
ments into a book only occurred later. The book could only retrospectively
lend coherence to what took place in the arsehole of the world (Levi 1987,
15–16). Levi even proposes, in his later meditation on witnessing the
Holocaust The Drowned and the Saved(1986), that the witnesses to the full
horror of Auschwitz are precisely those who can never bear witness, since they
are those who went under, who ‘drowned’, who were killed. As Paul Celan
writes, in what is perhaps the most succinct but inexhaustibly provoking
remark on this topic: ‘No one / bears witness for / the witness’ (Celan 1971,
241). The witness is always, in some sense, deprived. There is something
eerie and ghostly about the solitude of bearing witness.
Derrida adds another perception to our thinking of testimony, however,
a perception which is fundamental to the question of the Shoah, the destruc-
tion or burning, the Holocaust of World War Two in particular, but which will
also take us back to the question of war literature, and to the poems of
Tennyson, Owen and Homer. As Derrida argues, testimony involves a
‘universalizable singularity’ (Derrida 2000, 94). A testimony must in the first
place be singular, unique:
I am the only one to have seen this unique thing [the witness says], the only
one to have heard or to have been put in the presence of this or that, at a
determinate, indivisible instant; and you must believe me because you must
believe me – this is the difference, essential to testimony, between belief and
proof – you must believe me because I am irreplaceable. (40)
But at the same time, this singularity, this irreplaceability of testimony, of the
witness, must also be ‘exemplary’, must also stand as an example. The witness
implicitly announces that:
I swear to tell the truth, where I have been the only one to see or hear and
where I am the only one who can attest to it, this is true to the extent that
anyone in my place, at that instant, would have seen or heard or touched
the same thing and could repeat exemplarily, universally, the truth of my
testimony. The exemplarity of the ‘instant’, that which makes it an
‘instance’, if you like, is that it is singular, singular anduniversal, singularWar 307
and universalizable. The singular must be universalizable; this is the
testimonial condition. (41; translation modified)
Let us return to our three war poems and briefly consider how each is
caught up in its own way with problems of testimony and exemplarity. The
force of Homer’s narration of violent hackings and gory deaths involves the
specificity of those violations, the uniqueness of each slash, each stab. But
the force also inheres in the exemplarity of these actions and these scenes,
which means that one stab or slash has to take the place of thousands (just
as in Hollywood movies, for different, for financial reasons, a handful of
soldiers must take the place of thousands). The emotional, visceral effect on
us as readers is surely to make us imagine what it would be like to receive or
to deliver such violations of the body. And it is the terrible specificity, the
graphic violence of the images that gives them their sense of authenticity, even
as we understand that these acts take place in the realm of myth, that ‘Homer’
(whoever he was or they were) is not a witness, that ‘Homer’ is part of the
myth. Part of what is remarkable about these scenes, perhaps, is our uncer-
tainty about their undecidably mythic status (remembering that, as such
critics as Paul Veyne have argued, in Ancient Greek culture myths were at the
same time believed in and not believed in, seen as both true and not true (see
Veyne 1988)). By contrast, through the intimacy of his language, his touching
lyricism, Owen evokes a sense that this one soldier’s death stands for the
deaths of thousands of others and that the speaker’s authentically personal
witnessing of this death can stand as a wider argument about the futility of war.
The ‘Futility’ of the title is not just of this death but of all war deaths. But in this
case, it is on account of the ‘authenticity effect’ (as we might call it), the sense
that the speaker has been a witness to this particular individual death, that he
can speak with authority about war. Finally, Tennyson makes the opposite
argument, an argument for war or at least for its heroism, when he witnesses,
as a newspaper reader, the heroism of soldiers even in the face of blundering
officers. And it is precisely because his witnessing is not unique and indeed
not direct that his poem may seem to those living in the contemporary ‘age of
testimony’ to be false, phoney, unconvincing, crass.
The different testamentary structures of the poems of Tennyson, Owen
and Homer open up another question, the question of the ‘aesthetic’ pleasure
that we might take from scenes of death, sacrifice, savagery. Why do we like
to read and imagine such scenes? What is it about such scenes that is so com-
pelling, even as they repel? It is in dealing with paradoxical questions such as
these that psychoanalysis can be especially helpful. Freud’s ‘Psychopathic
Characters on the Stage’ (1904), for example, offers a rich exploration of308 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
drama and agon (or conflict), and of the reader’s or speaker’s suffering as
a form of ‘compensation’ (Freud 1985h, 123). In fact, war haunts the work
of Sigmund Freud. There are writings that specifically focus on its meanings
and psychological effects, such as ‘Thoughts for the Times on War and Death’
(1915), ‘On Transience’ (1916), ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917), and
‘Why War?’ (1933). But war is in fact everywhere in Freud’s thinking. Freud
is a great theorist of war and of agonmore generally. Amongst his most remark-
able, devastating essays in this context is ‘Civilization and Its Discontents’
(1930). Here he offers a compelling explanation for our delight in – and, to use
Seamus Heaney’s phrase from ‘Punishment’ (1975), our ‘civilized outrage’ at
– images of war. Freud argues that aggression goes deep but that it conflicts
with our sense of ‘civilization’, our sense of ourselves as civilized, cultured,
rational and reasonable beings. In ‘Civilization and Its Discontents’, he
argues that human beings are driven by what he calls the ‘pleasure principle’
but that the ‘programme of becoming happy...cannot be fulfilled’, and
indeed that ‘what we call our civilization is largely responsible for our misery’
(Freud 1985e, 271, 274). Freud suggests that there is a fundamental conflict
or contradiction between our primitive instincts – in particular our aggres-
siveness – and our desire or need for civilization (by which he means both
what he calls ‘Eros’, the ‘instinct’ of love, fellowship, community, and the need
for security). Rather than simply being ‘gentle creatures who want to be
loved’, Freud tells us, human beings are, ‘on the contrary, creatures among
whose instinctual endowments is to be reckoned a powerful share of
aggressiveness’ (302). It is ‘not easy for men to give up the satisfaction of this
inclination to aggression’, Freud argues, and they ‘do not feel comfortable
without it’ (304–5). The reason for our unhappiness, Freud suggests, is that
‘civilization’ demands that we forgo our ‘natural aggressive instinct, the hos-
tility of each against all and of all against each’ (313). ‘The price we pay for our
advance in civilization’, he declares, ‘is a loss of happiness through the height-
ening of the sense of guilt’ (327). In so-called ‘civilized’ society, our instinctual
aggression is turned inward, it becomes that kind of psychic violence of the
‘conscience’ experienced as feelings of ‘guilt’. Freud’s analysis of human
aggression and its conflict with the social or ‘civilized’ might help us to under-
stand something of the problem of the literature of war, and our ambivalence
in reading it.
Freud helps us to think differently about literature and war – more polemic-
ally, perhaps (‘polemic’ comes from the Greek polemos, war). In particular, his
work serves to challenge two perhaps rather naive, sentimental or unhistorical
conceptions about war literature. In the first place it allows us to question theWar 309
assumption that war is the opposite of peace and that peace is the natural or
normal condition of society. ‘War and Peace’: Leo Tolstoy’s title can easily be
read as articulating a contrast, an opposition. But it can also, and perhaps
more productively, be construed as a conjunction, a joining up. We might thus
start to explore the idea that there is no literature that is not war literature. War
in the Iliad, remember, never ends. And war in ‘post-war’ Europe and beyond
has never stopped – in colonial, neocolonial and postcolonial arenas; as the
‘cold war’ (in which ‘real’ war was displaced to other, mostly developing,
countries); in tribal conflicts, civil wars and inter-ethnic killings in Europe and
across the globe; and as the so-called ‘war against terror’, our new war of
religion. Second, Freud’s work encourages us to question the assumption that
the literature of war is, or should be, somehow ‘naturally’ or normally against
war, anti-war, pacifist or non-combatant. In fact, something of the opposite is
true: the history of Western literature is a history of warfare and belligerence,
of agon and polemos. From Homer’s Iliad to Virgil’s Aeneid to Chaucer’s
Troilus and Criseydeto Milton’s Paradise Lost, the epic tradition in particular,
that most elevated of genres, has celebrated the heroes of warfare and cele-
brated the victory of the mighty. And traces of war are found in more recent
epics even when they appear to be about other things than war. We could con-
sider, for example, William Wordsworth’s The Prelude(with its turning point
of the French Revolution), Keats’s Hyperion(a poem on the war of the gods),
Byron’s Don Juan (with its fascination with the Napoleonic Wars), Walt
Whitman’s Leaves of Grass(which according to Whitman himself ‘revolves
around’ the American Civil War), Ezra Pound’s The Cantos(which spans two
world wars), or David Jones’s In Parenthesis(recounting the poet’s experi-
ence as a soldier in the First World War).
We might remember Doris Lessing’s remark that it is ‘sentimental to dis-
cuss the subject of war, or peace, without acknowledging that a great many
people enjoy war – not only the idea of it, but the fighting itself’ and that this
is true ‘even of people whose experiences in war were terrible, and which
ruined their lives’ (quoted in Tatum 2003, 116). That certainly seems to have
been the case in the early twentieth century, at the beginning of its first ‘great’
war: Bertrand Russell expresses pacifist horror at finding in 1914 that ‘the
anticipation of carnage was delightful to something like ninety per cent of the
population’ (Russell 1968, 2:17). It is for this reason, perhaps, that literature
is not simply againstwar, the poetry is not only in the ‘pity’. And an under-
standing of this fact will perhaps better help us to understand the strange
double-talk and double-dealings of literature, and to appreciate the deep,
troubled and incessant conjunction of literature and war.310 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Further reading
For fascinating recent work on literature and the Holocaust see Geoffrey
Hartman’s Scars of the Spirit (2002), Daniel Schwartz’s Imagining the
Holocaust(1999), Susan Gubar’s Poetry After Auschwitz(2003) and Robert
Eaglestone, The Holocaust and the Postmodern (2004). More generally on
trauma and writing in relation to psychoanalysis, literature and history, see
Cathy Caruth’s Unclaimed Experience(1996); for an interesting discussion
of the significance of trauma in contemporary literature and culture, see Roger
Luckurst, The Trauma Question (2008); and for a helpful study of the
term and concept in Western cultural history more generally, see Ruth Leys,
Trauma: A Genealogy(2000). For a fascinating if challenging meditation on
AIDS writing, autobiography, writing about war, and on responses to trauma
generally, see Ross Chambers, Untimely Meditations(2004). For a psycho-
analytic approach to the question of aggression and war, see the title essay in
Jacqueline Rose’s Why War? (1993). James Tatum’s excellent study of the
culture of war in The Mourner’s Song(2003) focuses in particular on Homer
and the Vietnam war and touches on a number of points raised in this chapter;
James Winn’s The Poetics of War(2008) is a very readable book on what he
calls ‘the terrible beauty of war’. There are very many interesting and valuable
studies of literature and the First World War in particular: see, for example,
Paul Fussell’s The Great War and Modern Memory(1975), Samuel Hynes’s
A War Imagined: The First World War and English Culture(1990), Allyson
Booth’s Postcards from the Trenches (1996), Vincent Sherry, ed., The
Cambridge Companion to the Literature of the First World War(2005), and
more generally Tim Kendall, ed., The Oxford Companion to British and Irish
War Poetry(2007).

34. The end
Fin. The British comedians French and Saunders once did a parody of
Ingmar Bergman films, in which they occupy an isolated clifftop house
and moan at one another about alienation, death and damnation. The skit –
shot, naturally, in black and white – concludes as the two women look out
at the dismal grey seascape and see the letters ‘FIN’ appear amid the waves.
One turns to the other and asks, ‘What does it mean?’ As with all witticisms
perhaps, amusement here depends on a force of recognition: ‘fin’ is not a
dorsal fin or an abbreviation for ‘Finland’ but is immediately recognizable
as a word (rather pretentiously taken from the French language) meaning
‘The End’. And we all know what ‘The End’ means. It’s obvious. Or is it?
What is an end?
In ‘Little Gidding’ (1942), T.S. Eliot observes that ‘to make an end is to
make a beginning. / The end is where we start from.’ Certainly when it comes
to reflecting critically on our reading of a literary text, thinking about the end
is a good way of starting. We can ask ourselves various questions: How does
the text end? What effects does this ending have? Where does the text leave us
as readers? More specifically, what kindof ending does the text have? Is it
abrupt, surprising, inevitable, apocalyptic, bathetic? And why? All of these
are questions which assume that the end or ending is indeed final, conclusive,
closed. But what happens when we think about texts as having open endings?
In what ways might the text be seen as having an ending that is haunting,
ambiguous, suspenseful, unfinished, equivocal, undecidable? Inevitably per-
haps, the end of a literary text is both obvious and not so obvious – in some
senses closed, but in others open. In any case, a particularly helpful way of
reflecting on the overall force of a literary text is to analyse the nature and
impact of its ending.312 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
To provide a typology or systematic account of different kinds of endings,
in poems, plays, short stories and novels, would be an endless task, since every
ending is different from every other and each calls on the reader to respond to
this singularity. It may be a characteristic of many short stories that they end with
a twist, and it may be a characteristic of many sonnets that they end with a
rhyming couplet, but every short story and every sonnet still has to be thought
about on its own terms. In this way we might take the final line of Adrienne
Rich’s poem, ‘A Valediction Forbidding Mourning’ (1970), to be emblematic:
‘To do something very common, in my own way.’ Every poem, every literary
work, must have an ending – however open, suspended or apparently non-
conclusive – but each one has its own way of doing this ‘very common’ thing.
More than this, every literary work is open to rereading, and the way in
which its ending is appreciated or understood will vary, however imper-
ceptibly, not only from one reader to another but from one reading to another.
The idea of rereading can help us to clarify two important points about end-
ings. First, to consider the end, to reflect critically on how a text ends and what
effects it produces, is already to reread and, consequently, to recognize that
there is no single end to a literary work: the end is always multiple. It is always
possible to consider the end as happening in a number of different ways and in
the light of more than one reading. Second, to reflect critically on how a text
ends, and what impact it produces, is inevitably to think back, to think again
and in effect to reread everything that has led up to this end. Thus it may
be argued that, rather than being unusual or perverse, rereading is perhaps
unavoidable. In this sense we never get to the end of a text.
Literary texts call for rereading in various ways. Elizabeth Taylor’s short
story ‘Mr Wharton’ (1965) is about a girl called Pat Provis who has left her
home near Nottingham to work in London, and about her mother Hilda who
insists on coming down to help her move into a new flat in the suburbs. Pat
rather reluctantly puts up with her mother’s presence and begrudgingly
accepts her maternal attentions and assistance. A significant topic of conver-
sation, when Pat gets back from her day working as a secretary in an office, is
how disgusting her boss, Mr Wharton, is. He is one of those sorts of men who
(in Pat’s words) go out for lunch, ‘eat and drink themselves stupid, and then go
home and tell their wives what a hard day they’ve had’ (229). The story ends
with Hilda Provis on the train back to Nottingham and her daughter returning
home to the flat. Here is the twist:
In a positive deluge, Pat and Mr Wharton drove up to Number Twenty.
He, too, had an umbrella, and held it carefully over her as they went down
the garden path and round the side of the house.The end 313
‘Excusez-moi,’ she said, stooping to get the key from under the dustbin.
‘Could be a nice view on a nice day,’ he said.
‘Could be,’ she agreed, putting the key in the door. (234)
The revelation that Pat and her boss are apparently having (or are about
to begin having) an affair overturns the sense that we had been given that
Pat finds Mr Wharton repulsive. The twist, then, calls for a rethinking or
rereading of the text, even as it provides a final justification or clarification as
to why the text should be entitled ‘Mr Wharton’. It is also worth stressing,
however, that while this is an apparently straightforward, even banal example
of what Jeffrey Archer would call a story with ‘a twist in the tale’, and while it
ends in a clear and specific way, still the ending is open and multiple. It is not,
for example, entirely clear how these two characters feel about one another or
what kind of relationship is involved. More generally, this ending forces us to
rethink everything in the story up to that point: we cannot help but revise our
reading of the text. Finally, it is important to recognize that the end of Taylor’s
text, like that of many literary works, is explicitly future-oriented. The words
‘Could be’ mark an openness to the future in relation to the recounted time of
the narrative but they also mark an openness of ending and of interpretation.
Other texts call for other kinds of thinking about ends and rereading.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’ (1798; revised
1817) ends with a description of the effect of the tale of the Ancient Mariner on
the Wedding-Guest who has been forced to listen to it:
He went like one that hath been stunned,
And is of sense forlorn:
A sadder and a wiser man,
He rose the morrow morn. (ll.622–5)
The final stanzas of Coleridge’s poem constitute a sort of epilogue. We might
reasonably ask ourselves what status such an epilogue has in relation to the
idea of the end of a work: does the end come before the epilogue or is the epi-
logue itself the end? As in many of Shakespeare’s plays (As You Like It, All’s
Well That Ends Welland The Tempest, for instance), the epilogue functions
as a kind of supplement, and thus conforms to the paradoxical logic of both
coming afterthe end and at the same time being the end. Such a supplement is
paradoxical in that it both completes and adds to the story. More generally,
such endings are self-referential: just as the epilogues to Shakespeare’s plays
are explicitly about the fact that (as the King puts it, at the end of All’s Well
That Ends Well) ‘the play is done’, so the end of ‘The Rime of the Ancient314 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
Mariner’ specifically talks about the telling of the tale and the effect of this
telling on its listener (‘He went like one that hath been stunned / And is of
sense forlorn’). The Mariner’s tale, in other words, has already ended. Or has
it? These are the words that come after his tale is told:
‘Since then, at an uncertain hour,
That agony returns:
And till my ghastly tale is told,
This heart within me burns.
I pass, like night, from land to land;
I have strange power of speech;
That moment that his face I see,
I know the man that must hear me:
To him my tale I teach.’ (ll.582–90)
In a transfixing and haunting way, the tale of the Ancient Mariner both ends
and does not end. The ‘ghastly tale is told’ but what the tale tells is that it
can never finally be told: it is at once the product and the articulation of an
interminably recurring ‘agony’. It is a tale about demonization, about being
possessed by an ‘agony’ and by ‘strange power of speech’: it is a tale about its
own telling and, in situating the reader in the position of the Wedding-Guest,
it suggests that the end is only a beginning. Reading, or rereading, is inter-
minable. From start to finish, reading is it: to recall the bizarre first word of
Coleridge’s poem, ‘It is an Ancient Mariner...’ (l.1).
In a very different fashion, Jean Rhys’s novel Wide Sargasso Sea (1966)
ends with the Creole female narrator (Bertha or, more correctly perhaps,
Antoinette) preparing to set fire to the house in England belonging to the male
narrator (the never specifically named Mr Rochester). Antoinette/Bertha
waits for her guard, Grace Poole, to fall asleep:
I waited a long time after I heard her snore, then I got up, took the keys and
unlocked the door. I was outside holding my candle. Now at last I know why
I was brought here and what I have to do. There must have been a draught
for the flame flickered and I thought it was out. But I shielded it with my
hand and it burned up again to light me along the dark passage. (124)
Rhys’s novel depends on the reader’s acknowledgement of an intertextual
relationship with Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre, but it is only at the end that the
two dramatically collide. One of the things that makes this final passage so
extraordinary is the fact that it is not final. Rather, it leads us directly intoThe end 315
another text, into the fire that engulfs Thornfield Hall and kills Bertha Mason,
in Jane Eyre. More fundamentally still, it puts a light to all our assumptions
about Brontë’s novel, it calls on us to reread and rethink the whole of Jane
Eyreand its place and significance in the (white, middle-class or aristocratic)
English literary canon. With the end of Wide Sargasso Sea, Jane Eyre can
never be the same again.
The end of Wide Sargasso Seais both an end and not an end. It is both
closed and open. It is closed or conclusive in the sense that it leads us to the
dramatic and terrible moment of setting fire to the house, and of the narrator
in effect setting fire to herself. And it is open in the sense that it leads us into a
radically different encounter with another text. Wide Sargasso Seadislocates
everything in Jane Eyrethat marginalizes or silences the otherness of a non-
white (in this case West Indian Creole) subject and everything that marginal-
izes or silences the otherness of madness. The ending of Rhys’s novel is also
open in the sense that it calls for a rereading or for rereadings that are, in prin-
ciple, limitless. What is involved here is a notion of intertextuality not only in
its weak sense (Wide Sargasso Sea‘quotes’ or alludes to Jane Eyre) but also in
the strong sense of a text’s strictly unbounded capacity for referring to or link-
ing up with other texts. Thus the text of Wide Sargasso Seais linked up not
only with the text of Jane Eyre, for example, but with any and every other
text that might be classified as representative of ‘the traditional English novel’,
with any and every other text that portrays what Gilbert and Gubar call ‘the
madwoman in the attic’, with any and every text that ends with fire or entails a
holocaust, and so on. The end of Rhys’s text is open, above all perhaps, in the
sense that it is future-oriented. The novel ends with a suspension of time:
‘Now at last I know why I was brought here and what I have to do.’ It leads us
towards a terrible event, it leads us (in short) towards death, but it leaves us on
the threshold – or rather, to recall the very last words of the text, it leaves us
with suspended movement, in a ‘dark passage’.
Jane Eyreitself ‘ends’ with intertextuality. Specifically, it cites the end of
what is probably the most intertextually pervasive book in Western culture,
the Bible: ‘“Amen; even so come, Lord Jesus!”’ (Revelation 22:20). The
end of Jane Eyre, like the end of Wide Sargasso Sea, would then seem to
confirm a sense that texts are inevitably linked up with other texts and that
there is no simple end (or beginning) to any text. It may be, in fact, that
to emphasize texts as unfinished and unfinishable is characteristically modern
or, perhaps, postmodern. The writings of Franz Kafka and Samuel Beckett
are often thought of as being especially representative of twentieth-century
European literature. In this respect it should not seem surprising that Kafka’s
novels are unfinished and that they are about experiencing the interminable,316 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
or that Beckett’s great trilogy (Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable) ends
with the paradoxical words, ‘I can’t go on, I’ll go on’ (418). Poststructuralism
in particular challenges us to think critically about the ways in which the idea
of the end is in various ways paradoxical. It calls on us to acknowledge –
rather than to deny or ignore, or explain so as to defuse, as more traditional
literary criticism has done – the intractable complexities of aporia, suspense
and the undecidable.
We can briefly illustrate this in terms of the endings of two very different
twentieth-century novels, Elizabeth Bowen’s The Death of the Heart(1938)
and J.D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye(1951). Bowen’s magnificent novel
ends with a housemaid called Matchett taking a taxi to an obscure hotel some-
where in Kensington, intending to collect and take home the heartbroken
heroine of the novel, the 16-year-old orphan called Portia:
Matchett straightened her hat with both hands, gripped her bag more
firmly, mounted the steps. Below the steps the grey road was all stucco
and echoes – an occasional taxi, an occasional bus. Reflections of evening
made unlit windows ghostly; lit lights showed drawing-rooms pallid and
bare...
Through the glass door, Matchett saw lights, chairs, pillars – but there
was no buttons, no one. She thought: ‘Well, what a place!’ Ignoring the bell,
because this place was public, she pushed on the brass knob with an air of
authority. (318)
Bowen’s novel ends with this endless moment of suspense – before Matchett
enters the hotel. In this way Bowen’s novel dramatizes the idea that the end
of a text always figures a threshold, a place that is liminal and uncertain.
Moreover it is a threshold which we can never go beyond: Matchett never goes
into the hotel. Her intention (of collecting Portia) is never fulfilled.
Uncertainty or undecidability also marks the end of The Catcher in the Rye.
Its final chapter is a kind of epilogue, which begins with Holden Caulfield
declaring ‘That’s all I’m going to tell about’ and goes on to conclude:
...D.B. [Holden’s brother] asked me what I thought about all this stuff I
just finished telling you about. I didn’t know what the hell to say. If you want
to know the truth, I don’t knowwhat I think about it. I’m sorry I told so
many people about it. About all I know is, I sort of misseverybody I told
about. Even old Stradlater and Ackley, for instance. I think I even miss that
goddam Maurice. It’s funny. Don’t ever tell anybody anything. If you do,
you start missing everybody. (220)The end 317
The ending of Salinger’s novel emphasizes that the narrator is in some kind of
psychiatric institution but leaves in suspense the question of whether or not he
will stay there or what will happen if he leaves. The final passage is equivocal
and paradoxical: it suggests that the story or ‘stuff’ is ‘finished’ but that
there is more ‘to tell about’. We are presented not only with the narrator’s own
powerful ambivalence (‘I don’t knowwhat I think’) but also with a sense of
uncertainty as to whether or not we as readers have really been told anything
or where we are being left. What kind of end is this? Is it an end?
Poststructuralism entails a kind of thinking that tries to proceed by putting
the very idea of the end into question. ‘End’ here involves not only the sense of
‘conclusion’ (the end of a text, for instance) but also the sense of ‘goal’ and
‘purpose’ (the goal or purpose of reading a text, for instance). As regards
the sense of ‘the end’ as ‘the conclusion of the text’, we can see how this is
problematic and even impossible: as we have been trying to make clear, inter-
textuality and rereading (or rereadability) mean that, in important respects,
there is no end to any text. As regards the sense of ‘the end’ as ‘the goal’ or
‘purpose’, poststructuralist thinking highlights what is paradoxical. At issue
here is the very nature of human desire and the paradox of the idea that, as
we argue in greater detail in Chapter 21, desire is endless. Jacques Derrida,
for example, emphasizes that we cannot do without the notion of end as goal
or purpose (or, in its Greek form, telos). Nor can we do without the idea of a
fulfilment or plenitude of desire. As he puts it: ‘Plenitude is the end (the goal),
but were it attained, it would be the end (death)’ (Derrida 1988, 129).
The poetry ofJohn Ashbery is suggestive in this context. In a poem entitled
‘Soonest Mended’ (1970), he writes:
To step free at last, minuscule on the gigantic plateau –
This was our ambition: to be small and clear and free.
Part of what makes Ashbery’s poetry ‘postmodern’ is that it repeatedly articu-
lates the desire to ‘step free at last’ but at the same time repeatedly ironizes,
dislocates, writes off this gesture or ‘ambition’. Ashbery has described his
poems as being like dreams, and as texts for a reader to pick up, to start read-
ing and put down again at whatever point she or he chooses: like dreams,
Ashbery’s poems tend to give no coherent or comforting sense of how or why
they end, and yet they also convey a strong sense of the desire and need to
think in terms of ends.
In the end, of course, the end is death and, more generally perhaps, the end
of the world. It is not surprising, in this respect, that Jane Eyreshould end
with a quotation from the end of the book which tells of the end of the world318 An introduction to literature, criticism and theory
(‘The Book of Revelation’ or, in Greek, ‘The Apocalypse’). As Frank
Kermode demonstrates, in his brief classic The Sense of an Ending(1967),
‘the paradigms of apocalypse continue to lie under our ways of making sense
of the world’ (Kermode 1967, 28). Thus, for example, the great systems of
Western philosophy – such as Christianity and Marxism – make sense of the
world by imagining a future in which the world is fundamentally different, in
which ourworld has ended forever. Christianity and Marxism, then, engage
with desires that can be called apocalyptic. Such desires are crucial, also, for
an appreciation of literature. Literature offers at once an imaginative experi-
encing and a critical questioning of the end, and it does so in ways that can be
both at once exhilarating and unnerving. Literary texts, and particularly the
ends of literary texts, open on to the future. And as Derrida has observed:
‘The future can only be anticipated in the form of an absolute danger’ (Derrida
1976, 5). The end is coming, this is it, it’s now, right now, any moment now.
Further reading
Frank Kermode’s The Sense of an Ending(1967) is a remarkable and thought-
provoking account of literature and what he sees as the human need for ends.
Norman Cohn’s The Pursuit of the Millennium (1970) remains a standard
and accessible work of reference for the apocalyptic nature of religious and
political systems (especially Christianity and Nazism). Jacques Derrida’s
entire œuvre can be described as a sustained meditation on ‘the end’: see, in
particular, ‘The Ends of Man’, in Margins of Philosophy(Derrida 1982), ‘No
Apocalypse, Not Now (full speed ahead, seven missiles, seven missives)’
(1984), and ‘Of an Apocalyptic Tone’ (Derrida 1992c). On the way that
poems end, see Barbara Herrnstein Smith, Poetic Closure(1968). For a highly
engaging account of gender and culture at the fin de siècle, see Elaine
Showalter’s Sexual Anarchy(1991). Finally, see D.A. Miller, Narrative and
its Discontents (1981), a fascinating book on the endings of traditional
nineteenth-century novels. And then, to end yet again, death: see Peter
Brooks’s remarkable cogitations on death, narrative and the end-of-the-story,
in the essay ‘Freud’s Masterplot’ (in Brooks 1984), and Garrett Stewart’s
brilliant study of ending it all in fiction, Death Sentences(1984).

Glossary
Affective fallacy:term used by W.K. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley to designate
what they see as the error of making subjective responses (cognitive or emotional)
the criteria for interpretive, critical or aesthetic judgements.
Allegory: (Gk. ‘other speaking’) a narrative which – through allusion, metaphor,
symbolism, etc. – can be read not simply on its own terms but as telling another,
quite different story at the same time.
Alliteration:repeated consonant sounds, particularly at the beginning of words, e.g.
‘kiddies’ clobber’, ‘mountains of moonstone’. (See also assonance.)
Allusion:a reference, often only implicit or indirect, to another work of literature or
art, person, event, etc.
Ambiguity:where a word, phrase or text may be interpreted in more than one way,
but often taken to suggest an uncertainty between two (rather than three or more)
meanings or readings. (See also equivocality, polysemia, undecidability.)
Animism: the rhetorical figure whereby something inanimate or lifeless is given
attributes of life or spirit, e.g. Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights: ‘I believe at
Wuthering Heights the kitchen is forced to retreat altogether into another
quarter...the chairs, high-backed, primitive structures, painted green, one or
two heavy black ones lurking in the shade...’; or the opening of Shelley’s ‘Ode
to the West Wind’: ‘O wild West Wind, thou breath of Autumn’s being...’
Anthropocentrism:refers to everything in a culture that asserts or assumes that the
human (Gk. anthropos, ‘man’) is at the centre – whether of the universe, the world,
or the meaning of a text.
Anthropomorphism:the rhetorical figure whereby the non-human is described in
human terms (e.g. the legs of a table, the face of truth).
Aporia: a rhetorical figure for doubt. Especially associated with deconstructive
thinking, an aporia may arise when the reader encounters two or more contra-
dictory codes, ‘messages’ or ‘meanings’ in a text. It involves an impasse or site of
undecidability. (See also undecidability.)320 Glossary
Assonance:correspondence or ‘rhyming’ of vowel sounds, e.g. eat, sleep; ooze, droop.
Bathos:artistic falling-away; a sense of disappointment or anticlimax, expressed by
the writer or felt by the reader, e.g. the bathos in Matthew Arnold’s ‘The Buried
Life’, in the use of the word ‘melancholy’ at the culmination of a sentence which
might have been expected to conclude on a note of triumph or joy: ‘Yet still.../
As from an infinitely distant land, / Come airs, and floating echoes, and convey / A
melancholy into all our day’.
Catachresis:(Gk. ‘misuse’) rhetorical term for misuse or misapplication of language.
Catharsis:(Gk. ‘purgation’, ‘purification’) according to Aristotle, something that can
happen to a spectator or reader at the end of a tragedy, due to a release of emotional
tension arising from the experience of a paradoxical mixture of pity and terror.
Chiasmus:(from the Gk. letter χ) a rhetorical figure involving repetition and reversal,
e.g. ‘If you fail to plan, you plan to fail’. More broadly the term is used to refer to
forms of intercrossing or reversal whereby each of the two sides of a conceptual
opposition (e.g. man/woman, text/world, etc.) is shown to be reversible and para-
doxically to be present and functionally active in its opposite.
Close reading:‘method’ of reading emphasized by new critics which pays careful
attention to ‘the words on the page’ rather than the historical and ideological con-
text, the biography or intentions of the author and so on. Close reading, despite
its name, brackets questions of readers and reading as arbitrary and irrelevant to
the text as an artifact (see affective fallacy). It assumes that the function of reading
and criticism is simply to read carefully what is already ‘there’ in the text.
Closure:an ending, the process of ending.
Connotation:an association, idea or image evoked by a word or phrase. Roughly
equivalent to ‘suggestion’, connotation is distinct from denotation (what words
denote or signify).
Couplet:two successive rhyming lines in a poem, e.g. Alexander Pope’s ‘Epigram
Engraved on the Collar of a Dog I Gave to His Royal Highness’: ‘I am his Highness’
Dog at Kew: / Pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?’
Crypt: (Gk. kryptein, to hide) a term developed by the psychoanalysts Nicolas
Abraham and Maria Torok to describe effects of transgenerational haunting. A
crypt is a sort of ‘false unconscious’, the means by which a child is unknowingly
preoccupied by a secret or secrets transmitted by a parent.
Cultural materialism:cultural materialism may be considered as the British version
of new historicism. Both schools of criticism are characterized by newly theorized
and politicized readings of history and of literary texts. While new historicism is
particularly concerned with the textuality of history, however, cultural material-
ism, influenced by Raymond Williams’s version of Marxist criticism, focuses on
the material conditions of the production and reception of literary texts. Cultural
materialists are thus concerned to expose the ideological and political dimensions
of such texts.
Deconstruction:a term particularly associated with the work of Jacques Derrida.
Roughly speaking, deconstruction is desedimentation: to deconstruct is to shake
up and transform.Glossary 321
Defamiliarization:the Russian formalist critic Viktor Shklovsky uses the term ostra-
nenie, usually translated as ‘making strange’ or ‘defamiliarization’, to denote what
he sees as the primary function of literary texts – to make the familiar unfamiliar, to
renew the old, or make the habitual appear fresh or strange.
Deixis:a term from linguistics, referring to the use of words concerning the place and
time of utterance, e.g. ‘this’, ‘here’.
Denouement:(Fr: ‘unknotting’) either the events following the climax of a plot, or
the resolution of this plot’s complications at the end of a short story, novel or play.
Discourse:can mean simply ‘speech or language generally’, or ‘language as we use it’.
But the term is often used in more theoretical contexts to signify the use of language
associated with a particular institution, cultural identity, profession, practice or
discipline. In this way each discourse is one of a number of discourses (the
discourse of the colonizer, for instance, as distinct from that of the colonized).
Whether general or particular, discourse is always inscribed within relations of
power, within the structures and strictures of institutions.
Double bind:a double bind involves the kind of double or contradictory statement
or order which deconstructive criticism tends to focus on, e.g. the sentence ‘This
sentence is not true’ is both true and not true at the same time (if it’s true then it’s
not true and if it’s not true then it’s true). Rather differently, the sentence ‘Do not
read this sentence’ involves an order which can only be obeyed if it is disobeyed
(we have to read the sentence in order to know that we should not read it).
Ecocriticism:the study of literature from the perspective of the relationship between
humans and their environment.
Ekphrasis:(Gk. ‘description’) narrowly defined, ekphrasis involves the attempt to
describe a visual work of art in words; more generally, however, ekphrasis denotes
any attempt to encapsulate a visual image or perception or effect in language.
Elegy:(Gk. ‘lament’) a poem of mourning for an individual or a lament for a tragic
event; the adjective ‘elegiac’ may be used to describe a sense of mourning or loss
encountered in any text – poem or prose.
End-stopping:where lines of poetry end with punctuation, usually with strong punc-
tuation such as full stops, semi-colons or colons, e.g. in the penultimate section of
Wallace Stevens’s ‘An Ordinary Evening in New Haven’: ‘The wind has blown the
silence of summer away. / It buzzes beyond the horizon or in the ground: / In mud
under ponds, where the sky used to be reflected’. End-stopping is the opposite
of enjambement.
Enjambement:the phenomenon whereby one line of poetry carries over into the next
line without any punctuation whatsoever. Especially characteristic of poetry such
as Milton’s, Wordsworth’s and Shelley’s.
Epic:long narrative dealing with heroic deeds usually employing elevated language
and traditionally involving a heroic or ‘superhuman’ protagonist, e.g. The Odyssey,
Paradise Lost.
Epistemophilia:(Gk. ‘a love of knowledge’) epistemophilia is the desire for know-
ledge which literary texts produce in readers – the desire for the ‘truth’ or ‘meaning’
of the text, for example. Peter Brooks argues that epistemophilia is a dimension of322 Glossary
the sex drive, and that it involves a ‘dynamic of curiosity’ which may be thought to
be ‘the foundation of all intellectual activity’ (Brooks 1993, xiii).
Equivocality:like ‘ambiguity’, this suggests that a word, phrase, etc. has more than
one meaning but, while ‘ambiguous’ suggests that it may be possible to decide on
one primary meaning, ‘equivocal’ suggests that the meaning cannot be resolved.
(See also undecidability, polysemia.)
Essentialism:refers to ways of conceiving people, cultures, etc. as having certain
innate, natural or universal characteristics. Essentialism is strongly contested in
most contemporary literary theory. The following three statements are all examples
of essentialist thinking: (1) ‘I have a personality and individuality which is com-
pletely unaffected by anything out there in the “real” world, such as language,
economics, education, nationality, etc.’; (2) ‘Women are more intelligent, caring
and sensitive than men’; and (3) ‘At bottom, you are either white or black, and
that’s all there is to it’.
Fabula:(also referred to as ‘story’ or ‘histoire’) the events of a narrative.
Feminist criticism:feminist criticism seeks on the one hand to investigate and ana-
lyse the differing representations of women and men in literary texts and, on the
other hand, to rethink literary history by exploring an often marginalized tradition
of women’s writing. Feminist criticism is concerned to question and challenge
conventional notions of masculinity and femininity; to explore ways in which
such conventions are inscribed in a largely patriarchal canon; and to consider the
extent to which writing, language and even literary form itself are themselves
bound up with issues of gender difference.
Figure (of speech), figurative language:this is usually defined in negative terms –
that is to say, as non-literal language. Figurative language involves the entire field of
what is known as rhetoric and includes, for example, metaphor, simile, hyperbole,
anthropomorphism, etc.
Formalism:refers generally to kinds of criticism that emphasize the importance of the
formal dimensions of literary texts, such as prose style, rhyme, narrative structure,
verse-form and so on. In this respect formalism is seen to stress the importance of
form as (supposedly) distinct from content, meaning, social and historical context,
etc. The term can be encountered in two quite different contexts, namely Russian
formalism and the formalist concerns of American new criticism (or ‘close read-
ing’). In fact, the Russian formalists were not simply formalist: their close attention
to the specificity of literary form was consistently subordinate to more general
political, even revolutionary concerns.
Genre:a kind; a literary type or style. Poetry, drama, novel may be subdivided into
lyric (including elegy, ode, song, sonnet, etc.), epic, tragedy, comedy, short story,
biography, etc.
Hermeneutic:a term formerly used to designate attempts to establish a set of rules
governing the interpretation of the Bible in the nineteenth century; in the context
of contemporary criticism, the term refers to theories of interpretation more
generally.Glossary 323
Heteroglossia: (Gk. ‘other/different tongues’) term used by Mikhail Bakhtin to
describe the variety of voices or languages within a novel, but can be used of
any text to give the sense that language use does not come from one origin but is
multiple and diverse, a mixing of heterogeneous discourses, sociolects, etc. (See
also polyphony.)
Humanism:any system of thought that accords human beings central importance
can be called humanism. Humanism involves the belief that humans are unique
among animals (that they are not, in a sense, animals at all), as well as a resistance
to superstitious or religious thinking.
Hyperbole:a figure of speech which involves exaggeration, excess or extravagance,
e.g. ‘I’m starving’ instead of simply ‘I am hungry’, ‘incredible’ instead of ‘very
good’.
Ideology:while the term ‘ideology’ has a long history, its most common usage in con-
temporary literary criticism and theory originates in Marx’s distinction between
base and superstructure and refers to the way in which literary texts may be said
to engage with – to reinforce or resist – the governing social, cultural and especially
political ideas, images and representations of a society. Ideology, in the work
of writers such as Louis Althusser and Pierre Macherey, is seen as fundamental
to the very production of subjectivity itself, and for these writers, all cultural
signification (including that of literary texts) is ‘ideological’. According to this
thinking, ideology reflects the fact that no writer is merely ‘free’ to express him- or
herself, but is necessarily constrained by the conditions of the production of his or
her text, by his or her social, cultural, economic and political circumstances.
Ideology is thus held to be ineradicably inscribed in the literary text and the task of
the critic is to analyse the work’s often disguised or hidden ideological subtext.
Implied reader:Wolfgang Iser uses this term to denote a hypothetical reader towards
whom the text is directed. The implied reader is to be distinguished from the
so-called ‘real reader’.
Indeterminacy:see undecidability.
In medias res:(L. ‘in the middle of things’) starting a story in the middle of the action.
Intentional fallacy:W.K. Wimsatt and Monroe Beardsley’s term for what they see as
the mistake of attempting to interpret a literary text by appealing to the supposed
intentions of its author.
Interpretation:usually understood to involve an attempt to define the meaning or
meanings of a specific text, with the assumption that a text has a limited meaning or
meanings.
Intertextuality:a term coined by Julia Kristeva to refer to the fact that texts are con-
stituted by a ‘tissue of citations’, that every word of every text refers to other texts
and so on, limitlessly. Often used in an imprecise or weak sense to talk about echoes
or allusions.
Irony:a rhetorical figure referring to the sense that there is a discrepancy between
words and their meanings, between actions and their results, or between appear-
ance and reality: most simply, saying one thing and meaning another.324 Glossary
Jouissance:(Fr. ‘bliss’, ‘pleasure’, including sexual bliss or orgasm) a term intro-
duced into psychoanalytic theory by Jacques Lacan, to refer to extreme pleasure,
but also to that excess whereby pleasure slides into its opposite. Roland Barthes
uses the term to suggest an experience of reading as textual bliss. Similarly, Jacques
Derrida suggests that the effect of deconstruction is to liberate forbidden
jouissance.
Logocentrism:term introduced by Jacques Derrida in order to refer to everything in
Western culture that puts logos(the Gk. term for ‘word’, more broadly translatable
as ‘meaning’ or ‘sense’) at the centre. As Derrida argues, there is no simple escape
from logocentric thinking.
Lyric:usually a fairly short poem supposedly expressing the thoughts and emotions
of a speaker. Lyrics tend to be non-narrative in form.
Metafiction:a short story or novel which exploits the idea that it is (only) fiction, a
fiction about fiction. Arguably, however, there are metafictional dimensions in any
work of fiction. (See also self-reflexivity.)
Metaphor:a basic trope or figure of speech in which one thing is described in terms
of its resemblance to another thing, e.g. the verb ‘to fly’ in ‘she flew into his arms’.
(See also simile.)
Metonymy:a basic trope or figure of speech in which the name of an attribute of
an object is given for the object itself (e.g. in ‘the pen is mightier than the sword’,
pen is a metonym for writing; sword is a metonym, for fighting or war).
Metre:the pattern of stressed and unstressed syllables in verse – one of the primary
characteristics which may be said to distinguish verse from prose.
Mimesis:(Gk. ‘imitation’) the idea that literature attempts to represent ‘life’ or ‘the
world’ more or less accurately, as it ‘actually’ is, etc. (See also realism.)
Monologue:a text (or part of a text) consisting of the speech of a single person (usu-
ally a fictional narrator, character or persona) speaking in actual or virtual solitude.
In drama, referred to as a ‘soliloquy’.
Narrative:may be defined in terms of the recounting of a series of events and the
establishing of some (causal/temporal) relation between them.
Narratology:the field of critical and theoretical inquiry concerned with analysis of
the underlying narrative structure or form of literary and other texts. Originating
in the structuralist desire to produce a quasi-mathematical modelling of the deep
structure of all narrative texts, recent developments in the field have encom-
passed poststructuralism, psychoanalytic criticism, feminism and other tenden-
cies and have tended to move away from such scientism to examine the cultural and
political significance of the workings of specific narrative texts in their historical
context.
Narrator:the person or persona (as distinguished from the author) who is telling
a story. Narrators can be variously categorized: a so-called omniscient narrator
appears to know everything, an intrusive narrator gives his or her own comments
and opinions on the story, an unreliable narrator cannot be trusted for some reason
(e.g. he or she is prejudiced, exaggerating, lying), a first-person narrator presentsGlossary 325
himself or herself in the story as ‘I’, a third-person narrator speaks of his or her
characters as ‘she’, ‘he’, etc.
New historicism:like its British version, cultural materialism, new historicism in
the USA is concerned with a newly politicized and theorized historical criticism.
While cultural materialism traces its roots back to Raymond Williams, new his-
toricism is particularly influenced by Foucault’s investigations of the workings
of the institutions and discursive practices of medicine, psychology, the law, the
university and so on, by which subjects are constructed, by which ideas are
formed, and within which contexts literary texts are produced. New historicists
are concerned with what Louis Montrose, in a now famous chiasmus, calls the
‘historicity of texts and the textuality of history’ (in Veeser 1989): history is itself
‘textual’ and open to interpretation, while literary texts are subject to the circula-
tion of political and other currents of power.
Oxymoron:(Gk. ‘wise foolishness’) a trope which combines contradictory words
or ideas, e.g. ‘bittersweet’, ‘darkness visible’.
Paradox:an apparently contradictory or strange statement of how things are: that
which is apparently illogical or absurd but may be understood to be meaningful
or ‘true’.
Parody: an imitation of another work of literature (usually with exaggeration) in
order to make it seem ridiculous and/or amusing.
Paronomasia:word play. (See also pun.)
Pastiche:a work made up of imitation of other work(s); unlike parody, pastiche is not
necessarily designed to ridicule.
Performative: pertaining generally to performance and, in the context of drama, to
the active, dynamic effects of theatre. More specifically in the context of speech-act
theory and the analysis of literary texts, however, ‘performative’ is an adjective
referring to the capacity that statements have for doingas well as sayingthings.
A promise or an act of naming, for example, is a performative.
Peritext:term used by the narratologist Gerard Genette (1987) to denote elements
on the ‘threshold’ of a text such as the title, author’s name, preface, chapter titles,
indicators of generic identity (‘A Novel’, ‘A Memoir’, ‘A Romance’ and so on),
epigraph, footnotes, or indeed glossary.
Phallocentrism: refers to everything in a culture that asserts or assumes that the
phallus (the symbolic significance of a penis and more generally the patriarchy
linked to this) is at the centre.
Phallogocentrism:a term conflating logocentrism and phallocentrism, used to refer
to everything in language or meaning (logos) which is phallocentric. See also
logocentrismand phallocentrism.
Point of view:refers to the way in which the narrator ‘sees’ or interprets her or his
material: also referred to as ‘narrative perspective’.
Polyphony:literally, ‘having many voices’: the idea that, rather than originating in
a ‘single voice’ (cf. ‘univocal’), a literary text has multiple origins or voices.
Cf. heteroglossia, intertextuality.326 Glossary
Polysemia or polysemy:(Gk. ‘many meanings’) the quality of having several or many
meanings.
Poststructuralism:Term used to describe those kinds of thinking and writing that
disturb or exceed the ‘merely’ rational or scientific, self-assuredly ‘systematic’
work of structuralists. It is primarily associated with the work of Derrida, Lacan,
Foucault, Deleuze and Guattari, Cixous and (post-1967) Barthes. Poststructur-
alism entails a rigorous and, in principle, interminable questioning of every
centrism (logocentrism, ethnocentrism, anthropocentrism, etc.), of all origins
and ends, meaning and intention, paradigm or system.
Protagonist:the leading character in a story (hero or heroine).
Pun:a play on words alike or nearly alike in sound but different in meaning (e.g.
the word ‘grave’ in ‘Ask for me tomorrow and you shall find me a grave man’,
Romeo and Juliet, III, i).
Queer theory: taking as its starting point an assumption about the constructed-
ness of human sexualities, queer theory argues that sexuality is neither ‘innate’
nor ‘natural’ but subject to social, cultural, religious, educational, intellectual and
other influences. Following Michel Foucault, theorists such as Eve Kosofsky
Sedgwick, Judith Butler, Jonathan Dollimore and Joseph Bristow examine ways in
which masculinity and femininity, and homo- and heterosexuality, are represented
in literary and other texts and question traditional notions of the stability of such
categories. In the work of such critics, ‘queer theory’ is in fact central to any think-
ing about literary representation, homosexual, heterosexual or other.
Realism:a descriptive term particularly associated with the nineteenth-century novel
to refer to the idea that texts appear to represent ‘the world’ ‘as it really is’.
Rhyme:like assonance and alliteration, rhymes are everywhere, in prose as well as in
strictly ‘poetic’ texts. There are several varieties of rhyme, of which the most com-
mon are (i) full rhyme, e.g. ‘cat’/‘sat’; (ii) half-rhyme or off-rhyme, e.g. ‘beat’/‘keep’,
‘crime’/‘scream’; (iii) internal rhyme, where a rhyme occurs within a line of verse,
e.g. the ‘-ell’ rhymes in Keats’s ode ‘To Autumn’: ‘To swell the gourd, and plump
the hazel shells / With a sweet kernel; to set budding.../’; (iv) eye-rhyme, which
should be seen but not heard, e.g. ‘love’/‘prove’; (v) masculine or strong rhymes,
that is, words of one syllable, e.g. ‘cat’/‘sat’, etc.; (vi) feminine or weak rhymes, which
extend over more than one syllable, e.g. ‘follow’/‘hollow’, ‘qualify’/‘mollify’, etc.
Satire:the humorous presentation of human folly or vice in such a way as to make
it look ridiculous, e.g. Jonathan Swift’s A Modest Proposal.
Self-reflexivity:the phenomenon whereby a piece of writing refers to or reflects on
itself. Often used interchangeably with ‘self-referentiality’. (See also metafiction.)
Sibilance:an emphatic presence of ‘s’ or ‘z’ sounds.
Simile:a trope in which one thing is likened to another, specifically through the use
of ‘like’ or ‘as’ (a species of metaphor): in ‘The barge she sat in, like a burnish’d
throne / Burn’d on the water’ (Antony and Cleopatra, II, ii) there is a metaphor in
‘The barge...burn’d’ (it is not literally on fire), and a simile in ‘the barge...like
a burnish’d throne’.Glossary 327
Simulacrum: (L. ‘to make like’) in the postmodernism of Jean Baudrillard the
simulacrum is defined in terms of the substitution of the sign of the real for the
real itself, in terms of a copy without origin.
Sjuzhet:(Russian ‘plot’) term used by the Russian formalist critics and borrowed by
certain narratologists to denote the way in which a story is told, its ‘discourse’ or
telling, as opposed to the events of the narrative, the fabulaor story.
Sonnet:a lyric poem of (usually) fourteen lines, most commonly divided into units
of eight lines (octave) plus six (sestet), or of three quatrains (four lines each) and a
couplet.
Stanza: a grouping of lines of verse, usually forming a self-contained pattern of
rhymed lines – thus stanzas of a poem are normally of equal length.
Symbol:a figure in which one object represents another object (often an abstract
quality): conventional symbols include, for example, scales for justice, a dove for
peace, a goat for lust, a lion for strength, a rose for beauty or love, etc. A symbol is a
kind of metaphor in which the subject of the metaphor is not made explicit, and
may be mysterious or undecidable.
Teleology:literally, ‘to do with the study of the end, goal or purpose’. In contem-
porary literary studies, ‘teleology’ has to do with the idea that we think about texts
(or about our activities as readers) as having a particular kind or particular kinds
of telos(goal, purpose or end). One way of defining deconstruction or poststruc-
turalism would be as a sustained questioning of the meaning, value and effects of
teleological assumptions and ideas.
Trauma theory: (‘trauma’ from Gk. ‘a wound’) trauma theory is concerned with
ways in which traumatic events are represented in language. It is particularly con-
cerned with the difficulty or impossibility of such representations, particularly in
the context of a sense of the unspeakable or untellable and of Freud’s notion of
Nachträglichkeitor deferred action, whereby the trauma may properly be said to
be experienced only after it is retrospectively (re)interpreted.
Trope:(Gk. ‘turn’): any rhetorical figure or device.
Undecidability:the phenomenon or experience of being unable to come to a deci-
sion when faced with two or more possible readings or interpretations. In a weak
and imprecise sense, used interchangeably with ‘indeterminacy’. ‘Indeterminacy’
is a negative term, however, implying that a decision (about being unable to
determine a reading or interpretation) has already been reached. ‘Undecidability’,
on the other hand, stresses the active, continuing challenge of being unable
to decide.
Univocal:the quality of supposedly having only one meaning. ‘The cat sat on the mat’
might (and at some level must) be considered as a statement with univocal meaning:
everyone knows what it is referring to. But at another level univocality is always
open to question, in particular insofar as the context of a statement is never stable
but is always susceptible to alteration or recontextualization. For example: Does
‘cat’ mean ‘lion’ here? One person’s sense of ‘mat’ may not be someone else’s (it
may be their prize Persian rug). And so on.

Select bibliography of other introductory texts,reference works and anthologies
Introductions
Barry, Peter. 2002. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural
Studies. 2ndedn. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Bertens, Hans. 2001. Literary Theory: The Basics.London: Routledge.
Castle, Gregory. 2007. The Blackwell Guide to Literary Theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Culler, Jonathan. 1997. Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Eagleton, Terry. 1996. Literary Theory: An Introduction. 2nd edn. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Furniss, Tom and Michael Bath. 1996. Reading Poetry: An Introduction. London:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Selden, Raman, Peter Widdowson and Peter Brooker. 1997. A Reader’s Guide to
Contemporary Literary Theory. 4thedn. Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
Wolfreys, Julian. 2004. Critical Keywords in Literary and Cultural Theory.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Reference works
Brogan, T.V.F. 1994. The New Princeton Handbook of Poetic Terms. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Coyle, Martin, Peter Garside, Malcolm Kelsall and John Peck, eds. 1990.
Encyclopaedia of Literature and Criticism. London and New York: Routledge.
Cuddon, J.A., ed. 1992. The Penguin Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary
Theory. Harmondsworth: Penguin.Select bibliography of other introductory texts, reference works 329
Evans, Dylan. 1996. An Introductory Dictionary of Lacanian Psychoanalysis.
London: Routledge.
Gray, Martin. 1992. A Dictionary of Literary Terms. 2ndedn. Harlow, Essex and
Beirut: Longman York Press.
Groden, Michael and Martin Kreiswirth, eds. 1994. The Johns Hopkins Guide to
Literary Theory and Criticism. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Laplanche, J. and J.-B. Pontalis. 1973. The Language of Psycho-Analysis,
trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith. London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of
Psycho-Analysis.
Macey, David. 2000. The Penguin Dictionary of Critical Theory. London: Penguin.
Makaryk, Irena R., ed. 1993. Encyclopaedia of Contemporary Literary Theory:
Approaches, Scholars,Terms. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Sim, Stuart. 1995. The A–Z Guide to Modern Literary and Cultural Theorists. Hemel
Hempstead: Prentice Hall/Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Wolfreys, Julian, ed. 2002. The Edinburgh Encyclopaedia of Modern Criticism and
Theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Wright, Elizabeth, ed. 1992. Feminism and Psychoanalysis: A Critical Dictionary.
Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Anthologies
Leitch, Vincent B., ed., 2001. The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism. New
York: Norton.
Lentricchia, Frank and Thomas McLaughlin, eds. 1995. Critical Terms for Literary
Study. 2ndedn. London and Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lodge, David, and Nigel Wood., eds., 2008. Modern Criticism and Theory. 3rdedn.
London: Longman.
McQuillan, Martin. 2000. Deconstruction: A Reader. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Rice, Philip, and Patricia Waugh. 2001. Modern Literary Theory: A Reader. 4thedn.
London: Arnold.
Ryan, Michael and Julie Rivkin, eds. 2004. Literary Theory: An Anthology. 2ndedn.
Oxford:Blackwell.
Walder, Dennis, ed. 2004. Literature in the Modern World: Critical Essays and
Documents. 2ndedn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Waugh, Patricia, ed., 2006. Literary Theory and Criticism: An Oxford Guide.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Literary works discussed
Achebe, Chinua. Things Fall Apart. London: Heinemann, 1986.
Achebe, Chinua. Anthills of the Savannah. London: Heinemann, 1987.
Anon. ‘Sir Patrick Spens’, in The Penguin Book of Ballads, ed. Geoffrey Grigson.
Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1975.
Arnold, Matthew. Preface to Poems(1835), ‘To Marguerite – Continued’, ‘Dover
Beach’, in The Poems ofMatthew Arnold, ed. Kenneth Allott. London: Longman,
1965.
Ashbery, John. ‘Soonest Mended’, in The Double Dream of Spring. New York: Ecco
Press, 1975.
Atwood, Margaret. ‘Giving Birth’, in Dancing Girls and Other Stories. London:
Virago, 1985.
Auden, W.H. ‘In Memory of W.B. Yeats (d. Jan. 1939)’, in Collected Poems, ed.
Edward Mendelson. London: Faber and Faber, 1991.
Austen, Jane. Pride and Prejudice, ed. Frank W. Bradbrook. London: Oxford
University Press, 1970.
Ayres, Michael. ‘Bittersweet’, in Poems 1987–1992. Nether Stowey, Somerset:
Odyssey Poets, 1994.
Beckett, Samuel. Molloy, Malone Dies, The Unnamable. London: Calder and Boyars,
1959.
Beckett, Samuel. Murphy. London: Picador, 1973.
Beckett, Samuel. Waiting for Godot. London: Faber and Faber, 1986.
Blake, William. ‘The Marriage of Heaven and Hell’, in Blake: The Complete Poems,
2ndedn, ed. W.H. Stevenson. London: Longman, 1989.
Bowen, Elizabeth. Friends and Relations. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1943.
Bowen, Elizabeth. The Heat of the Day. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976.
Bowen, Elizabeth. The Death of the Heart. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987.
Bowen, Elizabeth. A World of Love. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1988.
Brontë, Charlotte. Jane Eyre. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1966.Literary works discussed 331
Brontë, Emily. Wuthering Heights. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1965.
Browning, Robert. ‘Two in the Campagna’, in Robert Browning: Selected Poetry, ed.
Daniel Karlin. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989.
Byron. Poetical Works. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970.
Carver, Raymond. ‘Fat’ and ‘Cathedral’ in Where I’m Calling From: The Selected
Stories. London: Harvill, 1993.
Celan, Paul. Speech-Grille and Selected Poems, trans. Joachim Neugroschel. New
York:Dutton, 1971.
Chandler, Raymond. The Little Sister. New York: Vintage Books, 1988.
Chaucer, Geoffrey. The Canterbury Tales: Nine Tales and the General Prologue, eds
V.A. Kolve and Glending Olson. New York: Norton, 1989.
Coleridge, S.T. Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 6 vols, ed. Earl Leslie
Griggs. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1956–71.
Coleridge, S.T. ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’, ‘Kubla Khan’, in The Oxford
Authors Samuel Taylor Coleridge, ed. H.J. Jackson. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1985.
Conrad, Joseph. Heart of Darkness. Harmondsworth: Penguin Popular Classics,
1994.
Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy. Inferno I: Italian Text and Translation, trans.
Charles S. Singleton. New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1970.
DeLillo, Don. The Body Artist. London: Picador, 2001.
Dickens, Charles. Great Expectations. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1965.
Dickinson, Emily. ‘Our Lives are Swiss’, ‘I taste a liquor never brewed’, ‘A Bird came
Down the Walk’, in The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson, ed. Thomas H.
Johnson. London: Faber and Faber, 1970.
Eliot, George. Middlemarch. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1965.
Eliot, George. The Lifted Veil. London: Virago, 1985.
Eliot, George. Daniel Deronda. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987.
Eliot, T.S. The Waste Land, ‘Little Gidding’, in Complete Poems and Plays. London:
Faber and Faber, 1975.
Ellison, Ralph. Invisible Man. New York: Random House, 1952.
Eugenides, Jeffrey. Middlesex. London: Bloomsbury, 2003.
Ford, Ford Madox. The Good Soldierin The Bodley Head Ford Madox Ford, vol. 1.
London: Bodley Head, 1962.
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins. The Yellow Wallpaper. London: Virago, 1981.
Hardy, Thomas. ‘Neutral Tones’, ‘The Voice’, ‘The Darkling Thrush’, in The
Oxford Authors Thomas Hardy, ed. Samuel Hynes. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1984.
Hazlitt, William. The Complete Works of William Hazlitt, 21 vols, ed. P.P. Howe.
London: Dent, 1930–34.
Heaney, Seamus. North. London: Faber and Faber, 1975.
Homer. The Iliad, trans. Robert Fagles, introduction and notes by Bernard Knox.
New York: Penguin, 1990.332 Literary works discussed
Ibsen, Henrik. Four Major Plays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981.
James, Henry. The Turn of the Screw, in The Bodley Head Henry James, vol. XI, ed.
Leon Edel. London: Bodley Head, 1974.
James, Henry. ‘The Jolly Corner’, in Major American Short Stories, ed. A. Walton
Litz. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Jonson, Ben. A Critical Edition of the Major Works, ed. Ian Donaldson. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1988.
Joyce, James. ‘The Dead’, in Dubliners. London: Everyman, 1991.
Kafka, Franz. The Collected Aphorisms, trans. Malcolm Pasley. Syrens: London,
1994.
Kafka, Franz. ‘In the Penal Colony’, and ‘The Burrow’ in The Complete Short Stories
of Franz Kafka, ed. Nabu N. Glatzer. London: Minerva, 1992.
Keats, John. The Letters of John Keats, 1814–1821, 2 vols, ed. Hyder Edward
Rollins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
Keats, John. ‘Ode to a Nightingale’, ‘Ode on Melancholy’, ‘This Living Hand’, in
The Poems of John Keats, ed. Jack Stillinger. London: Heinemann, 1978.
Larkin, Philip. ‘This Be The Verse’, in Collected Poems, ed. Anthony Thwaite.
London: Faber and Faber, 1988.
Lawrence, D.H. ‘The Mosquito’, in The Complete Poems of D. H. Lawrence, ed.
Vivian de Sola Pinto and F. Warren Roberts. New York: Viking Press, 1975.
Lawrence, D.H. ‘The Rocking-Horse Winner’, in The Collected Short Stories of
D.H. Lawrence. London: Heinemann, 1974.
Lawrence, D.H. St. Mawr. The Virgin and the Gipsy. Harmondsworth: Penguin,
1950.
McCarthy, Cormac. 2007. The Road. Basingstoke: Picador.
Mansfield, Katherine. ‘Bliss’, in The Stories of Katherine Mansfield, ed. Antony
Alpers. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Marvell, Andrew. ‘To His Coy Mistress’, in The Oxford Authors Andrew Marvell,
ed. Frank Kermode and Keith Walker. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick; or, The Whale, ed. Harold Beaver. Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1972.
Miller, Arthur. The Crucible. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1988.
Milton, John. Complete Shorter Poems, ed. John Carey. London: Longman, 1971.
Milton, John. Paradise Lost, ed. Scott Elledge, 2ndedn. New York: Norton, 1993.
Monty Python’s Flying Circus. Just the Words, 2 vols. London: Methuen, 1989.
Morrison, Toni. The Bluest Eye. London: Triad/Panther, 1981.
Morrison, Toni. Beloved. London: Picador, 1988.
Murray, Les. ‘Cuttlefish’, in Translations from the Natural World. Manchester:
Carcanet Press, 1992.
O’Connor, Flannery. ‘Revelation’, in The Secret Self: Short Stories by Women, ed.
Hermione Lee. London: Everyman, 1991.
Owen, Wilfred. ‘Futility’, in The Poems of Wilfred Owen, ed. John Stallworthy.
London: Hogarth, 1985.Literary works discussed 333
Plath, Sylvia. ‘Daddy’, in Collected Poems, ed. Ted Hughes. London: Faber and
Faber, 1981.
Poe, Edgar Allan. ‘The Premature Burial’, ‘The Purloined Letter’, in Tales of Mystery
and Imagination. London: Dent, 1984.
Ponge, Francis. ‘The New Spider’, in Things: Selected Writings, trans. Cid Corman.
New York: White Pine Press, 1986.
Pope, Alexander. ‘An Essay on Criticism’, in The Poems of Alexander Pope, ed. John
Butt. London: Methuen, 1963.
Proust, Marcel. A la recherche du temps perdu. Paris: Gallimard, 1954.
Rhys, Jean. ‘Let Them Call It Jazz’, in The Secret Self: Short Stories by Women, ed.
Hermione Lee. London: Everyman, 1991.
Rhys, Jean. Wide Sargasso Sea, ed. Angela Smith. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1997.
Rich, Adrienne. ‘A Valediction Forbidding Mourning’, in The Fact of a Doorframe:
Poems Selected and New, 1950–84. New York: Norton, 1984.
Rushdie, Salman. Midnight’s Children. London: Picador, 1982.
Rushdie, Salman. The Satanic Verses. New York: Viking, 1988.
Salinger, J.D. The Catcher in the Rye. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987.
Shakespeare, William. All’s Well That Ends Well, Romeo and Juliet, Twelfth Night,
Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, Macbeth, The Tempest, ‘Sonnet 20’, ‘Sonnet 55’, in
The Riverside Shakespeare. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1974.
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus, eds D.L.
Macdonald and Kathleen Scherf. Peterborough, Ontario: Broadview, 1994.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe. ‘Ozymandias’, ‘To a Sky-Lark’, ‘A Defence of Poetry’, in
Shelley’s Poetry and Prose, eds Donald H. Reiman and Sharon B. Powers. New
York: Norton, 1977.
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley. The Rivals, ed. Elizabeth Duthie. London: Ernest Benn,
1979.
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley. The School for Scandal, ed. F.W. Bateson. New York:
Norton, 1979.
Sidney, Sir Philip. An Apology for Poetry, ed. Geoffrey Shepherd. London: Nelson,
1965.
Sophocles. The Three Theban Plays: Antigone, Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus,
trans. Robert Fagles. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984.
Sterne, Laurence. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, ed. Ian
Campbell Ross. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983.
Stevens, Wallace. ‘Large Red Man Reading’, ‘The Man with the Blue Guitar’ and
‘Tea at the Palaz of Hoon’, in The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens. New York:
Alfred Knopf, 1954.
Stevens, Wallace. ‘Adagia’, in Opus Posthumous. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1957.
Stevens, Wallace. Letters of Wallace Stevens, ed. Holly Stevens. New York: Alfred
Knopf, 1966.
Swift, Jonathan. ‘A Modest Proposal’, in The Writings of Jonathan Swift, eds Robert
A. Greenberg and William Bowman Piper. New York: Norton, 1973.334 Literary works discussed
Taylor, Elizabeth. ‘Mr Wharton’, in The Secret Self: Short Stories by Women, ed.
Hermione Lee. London: Everyman, 1991.
Tennyson, Alfred Lord. ‘The Charge of the Light Brigade’, in The Poems of
Tennyson, ed. Christopher Ricks. London: Longman, 1987.
Traherne, Thomas. ‘Centuries of Meditations’, in Selected Poems and Prose, ed. Alan
Bradford. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991.
Twain, Mark. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, eds Walter Blair and Victor
Fischer. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988.
Wertenbaker, Timberlake. Our Country’s Good. London: Methuen, 1988.
Whitman, Walt. ‘Song of Myself’, in Leaves of Grass. New York: Signet, 2000.
Winterson, Jeanette. Sexing the Cherry. London: Bloomsbury, 1989.
Winterson, Jeanette. Written on the Body. London: Jonathan Cape, 1992.
Woolf, Virginia. ‘The Mark on the Wall’, in A Haunted House and Other Short Stories.
London: Grafton, 1982.
Woolf, Virginia. Orlando: A Biography. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Wordsworth, William. The Prelude 1799, 1805, 1850, eds Jonathan Wordsworth,
M.H. Abrams and Stephen Gill. London: Norton, 1979.
Wordsworth, William. ‘Alice Fell’, ‘A Slumber did my Spirit Seal’, ‘Ode: Intimations
of Immortality’, in The Oxford Authors William Wordsworth, ed. Stephen Gill.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Wordsworth, William. ‘Nutting’, in Lyrical Ballads and Other Poems, 1797–1800,
ed. James Butler and Karen Green. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992.
Wyatt, Sir Thomas. ‘Whoso List to Hunt’, in Collected Poems, ed. Joost Daalder.
London: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Yeats, W.B. ‘The Wheel’, in The Collected Poems of W.B. Yeats. London: Macmillan,
1977.

Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Abbott, H. Porter. 2002. The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Abraham, Nicolas. 1994. ‘Notes on the Phantom: A Complement to Freud’s
Metapsychology’ (1975) and ‘The Phantom of Hamlet orThe Sixth Act, preceded
byThe Intermission of “Truth”’ (1975), in The Shell and the Kernel: Renewals
of Psychoanalysis, Nicolas Abraham and Maria Torok, trans. Nicholas Rand.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Abrams, M.H. 1953. The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical
Tradition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Afzal-Khan, Fawzia and Kalpana Seshadri-Crooks, ed. 2000. The Pre-Occupation of
Postcolonial Studies. Durham: Duke University Press.
Ahmed, Sara. 2006. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham:
Duke University Press.
Allen, Graham. 2000. Intertextuality. London: Routledge.
Alter, Robert. 1981. The Art of Biblical Narrative. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Alter, Robert. 1985. The Art of Biblical Poetry. New York: Basic Books.
Althusser, Louis. 1969. ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses’ and ‘A Letter
on Art’, in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays, trans. Ben Brewster, 2ndedn.
London: New Left Books, 1977.
Appelbaum, David. 1990. Voice.Albany: State University of New York.
Apter, Terry E. 1982. ‘The Uncanny’, in Fantasy Literature: An Approach to Reality.
London: Macmillan.
Aristotle. 1941. The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon. New York:
Random House.
Aristotle. 1965. On the Art of Poetry, in Classical Literary Criticism, Trans. T.S.
Dorsch. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Aristotle. 2001. On the Parts of Animals, trans. James G. Lennox. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.336 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Armbruster, Karla, and Kathleen R. Wallace, eds. 2001. Beyond Nature Writing:
Expanding the Boundaries of Ecocriticism. Charlottesville, VA: University of
Virginia Press.
Armstrong, Philip. 2008. What Animals Mean in the Fiction of Modernity. London:
Routledge.
Armstrong, Tim. 1998. Modernism, Technology and the Body: A Cultural Study.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arnold, Matthew. 1964. ‘The Function of Criticism at the Present Time’, in Essays in
Criticism. New York: Everyman’s Library.
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin, eds. 1989. The Empire Writes Back.
London: Routledge.
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin, eds. 1995. The Post-Colonial
Studies Reader. 2ndedn. London: Routledge.
Attridge, Derek. 1992. Poetic Rhythm. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Audi, Robert, ed. 1999. The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, 2ndedn. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Austin, J.L. 1962. How to do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Austin, J.L. 1970. ‘Performative Utterances’, in Philosophical Papers, 2ndedn, eds
J.O. Urmson and G.J. Warnock. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Badmington, Neil, ed. 2000. Posthumanism. London: Palgrave.
Badmington, Neil, ed. 2007. Derridanimals. Special issue of the Oxford Literary
Review, vol. 29.
Baker, Steve. 2000. The Postmodern Animal. London: Reaktion.
Bakhtin, M.M. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays, trans. M. Holquist and
C. Emerson. Austin: University ofTexas Press.
Bakhtin, M.M. 1992. From ‘Discourse in the Novel’, in Modern Literary Theory: A
Reader, eds Philip Rice and Patricia Waugh. London: Edward Arnold.
Baldick, Chris. 1987. In Frankenstein’s Shadow: Myth, Monstrosity, and Nineteenth-
Century Writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Balibar,E´tienne and Pierre Macherey. 1981. ‘On Literature as an Ideological Form’,
in Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist Reader, ed. Robert Young. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Barker, Francis and Peter Hulme. 1985. ‘Nymphs and Reapers Heavily Vanish: The
Discursive Con-Texts of The Tempest’, in Alternative Shakespeares, ed. John
Drakakis. London: Routledge.
Barker, Howard. 1989. Arguments for a Theatre. London: John Calder.
Barthes, Roland. 1972. Mythologies, trans. Annette Lavers. London: Jonathan Cape.
Barthes, Roland. 1977a. ‘The Death of the Author’, in Image Music Text, trans.
Stephen Heath. London: Fontana.
Barthes, Roland. 1977b. ‘From Work to Text’, in Image Music Text, trans. Stephen
Heath. London: Fontana.
Barthes, Roland. 1977c. Roland Barthes by Roland Barthes, trans. Richard Howard.
New York: Hill and Wang.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 337
Barthes, Roland. 1981. ‘Theory of the Text’, in Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist
Reader, ed. Robert Young. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Barthes, Roland. 1990a. The Pleasure of the Text, trans. Richard Miller. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Barthes, Roland. 1990b. S/Z, trans. Richard Miller. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Barthes, Roland. 1990c. A Lover’s Discourse: Fragments, trans. Richard Howard.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bataille, Georges. 1973. Oeuvres Complètes, vol. V. Paris: Gallimard.
Bataille, Georges. 1985. Literature and Evil, trans. Alistair Hamilton. London:
Marion Boyars.
Bate, Jonathan. 1991. Romantic Ecology: Wordsworth and the Environmental
Tradition. London: Routledge.
—.2000. The Song of the Earth. London: Picador.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1988. ‘Simulacra and Simulations’, in Selected Writings, ed. Mark
Poster. Cambridge: Polity.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1990. Seduction, trans. Brian Singer. London: Macmillan.
Baudrillard, Jean. 1995. The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, trans. Paul Patton.
Sydney: Power Publications.
Beckett, Samuel. 1983. Disjecta: Miscellaneous Writings and a Dramatic Fragment.
London: John Calder.
Beja, Morris. 1971. Epiphany in the Modern Novel. London: Peter Owen.
Belfiore, Elizabeth S. 1992. Tragic Pleasures: Aristotle on Plot and Emotion.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Belsey, Catherine. 1994. Desire: Love Stories in Western Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bertens, Hans, and Joseph Natoli, eds. 2001. Postmodernism: The Key Figures.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Bennett, Andrew, ed. 1995. Readers and Reading. London: Longman.
Bennett, Andrew. The Author. London: Routledge. 2005.
Bennett, Tony. 1979. Formalism and Marxism. London: Methuen.
Berger, Anne-Emmanuelle. 2005. ‘Sexing Differances’, in Derrida’s Gift (special
issue), differences, 16: 3.
Berger, Anne and Marta Segarra, eds. 2009. Demenageries. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Bergson, Henri. 1921. Laughter: An Essay on the Meaning of the Comic, trans.
Cloudesley Brereton and Fred Rothwell. London: Macmillan.
Berry, Francis. 1962. Poetry and the Physical Voice. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Bersani, Leo. 1978. A Future for Astyanax: Character and Desire in Literature.
Boston: Little Brown.
Bersani, Leo. 1990. The Culture of Redemption. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Bersani, Leo. 1995. Homos. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bhabha, Homi, ed. 1990. Nation and Narration. London: Routledge.
Bersani, Leo and Adam Phillips. 2008. Intimacies. Chicago: Chicago University Press.338 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Bhabha, Homi K. 1996. ‘Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of Colonial
Discourse’, in eds Philip Rice and Patricia Waugh, Modern Literary Theory: A
Reader, 3rdedn. London: Edward Arnold.
Biriotti, Maurice and Nicola Miller, eds. 1993. What is an Author? Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Blanchot, Maurice. 1981. ‘The Narrative Voice (the “he”, the neuter)’, in The Gazeof
Orpheus and Other Literary Essays, trans. Lydia Davis. New York: Station Hill.
Blanchot, Maurice. 1995. The Work of Fire, trans. Charlotte Mandell. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Blanchot, Maurice. 1999. The Station Hill Blanchot Reader: Fiction and Literary
Essays, trans. Lydia Davis, Paul Auster and Robert Lamberton, ed. George
Quasha. Barrytown, New York: Station Hill Press.
Blair, Hugh. 1842. Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, ed. William Milner.
Bloom, Harold. 1973. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bloom, Harold. 1990. ‘The Analysis of Character’, in Holden Caulfield, ed. Harold
Bloom. New York: Chelsea House.
Bloom, Harold. 1994. The Western Canon: The Book and School of the Ages.London:
Macmillan.
Bloom, Harold. 2000. How to Read and Why. London: Fourth Estate.
Boden, Margaret A. 2004. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd edn.
London and New York: Routledge.
Boone, Joseph Allen. 1987. Tradition and Counter Tradition: Love and the Form of
Fiction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boone, Joseph Allen. 1988. Libidinal Currents. Sexuality and the Shaping of
Modernism. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Booth, Allyson. 1996. Postcards from the Trenches: Negotiating the Space Between
Modernism and the First World War. New York: Oxford University Press.
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel. 1987. ‘The Laughter of Being’, in Modern Language Notes,
102, no. 4: 737–60.
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel. 1988. The Freudian Subject, trans. Catherine Porter.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Botting, Fred, ed. 1995. Frankenstein: New Casebook. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Botting, Fred. 1997. Gothic. London: Routledge.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste, trans.
Richard Nice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bowen, Elizabeth. 1986. The Mulberry Tree. London: Virago.
Bowen, Elizabeth. 1970. ‘A Novelist and His Characters’, in Essays by Divers Hands:
Being the Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature, vol. 26, ed. Mary Stocks.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bowie, Malcolm. 1991. Lacan. London: Fontana.
Bowra, Maurice. 1930. Tradition and Design in ‘The Iliad’. London: Oxford
University Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 339
Bradley, A.C. 1904. Shakespearean Tragedy: Lectures on Hamlet, Othello, King Lear,
Macbeth. London: Macmillan.
Brannigan, John. 1998. New Historicism and Cultural Materialism. London:
Macmillan.
Brecht, Bertolt. 1978. ‘A Short Organum for the Theatre’, in Brecht on Theatre: The
Development of an Aesthetic, ed. and trans. John Willett. London: Eyre Methuen.
Brewster, Scott, John L. Joughin, David Owen and Richard Walker, eds. 2000.
Inhuman Reflections: Thinking the Limits of the Human. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Bristow, Joseph. 1992a. ‘Introduction’ to Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being
Earnest and Related Writings. London: Routledge.
Bristow, Joseph, ed. 1992b. Sexual Sameness: Textual Differences in Lesbian and
Gay Writing. London: Routledge.
Bristow, Joseph. 1995. Effeminate England: Homoerotic Writing after 1885.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Bristow, Joseph. 1997. Sexuality. London: Routledge.
Bronfen, Elisabeth. 1992. Over Her Dead Body: Death, Femininity and the Aesthetic.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Brooke-Rose, Christine. 1958. A Grammar of Metaphor. London: Secker and
Warburg.
Brooker, Peter, ed. 1992. Modernism/Postmodernism. London: Longman.
Brooks, Peter. 1984. Reading for the Plot: Design and Intention in Narrative.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brooks, Peter. 1993. Body Work: Objects of Desire in Modern Narrative. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Broswimmer, Franz J. 2002. Ecocide: A Short History of the Mass Extinction of Species.
London: Pluto.
Brown, Paul. 1994. ‘“This thing of darkness I acknowledge mine”: The Tempestand
the Discourse of Colonialism’, in Political Shakespeare: Essays in Cultural
Materialism, eds Jonathan Dollimore and Alan Sinfield, 2nd edn. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Buchanan, Ian and John Marks. 2000. Deleuze and Literature. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Burke, Seán. 1998. The Death and Return of the Author: Criticism and Subjectivity in
Barthes, Foucault and Derrida, 2ndedn. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Burke, Seán, ed. 1995. Authorship: From Plato to the Postmodern: A Reader.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Burnett, Mark Thornton. 2002. Constructing ‘Monsters’ in Shakespearean Drama
and Early Modern Culture. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Buse, Peter and Andrew Stott, eds. 1999. Ghosts: Deconstruction, Psychoanalysis,
History. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Butler, Judith. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity.
London: Routledge.340 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Butler,Judith. 1991. ‘Imitation and Gender Insubordination’, in Inside/Out: Lesbian
Theories, Gay Theories, ed. Diana Fuss. New York: Routledge.
Butler, Judith. 1993. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of‘Sex’. New York:
Routledge.
Butler, Judith. 1997. Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative. New York:
Routledge.
Calarco, Matthew. 2008. Zoographies: The Question of the Animal from Heidegger to
Derrida. New York: Columbia University Press.
Campbell, Sueellen. 1996. ‘The Land and Language of Desire: Where Deep Ecology
and Post-Structuralism Meet’. In Glotfelty and Fromm, eds. The Ecocriticism
Reader.: P 124–36.
Caputo, John D. and Gianni Vattimo. 2007. After the Death of God. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Carper, Thomas and Derek Attridge. 2003. Meter and Meaning: An Introduction to
Rhythm in Poetry. New York: Routledge.
Caruth, Cathy. 1996. Unclaimed Experience: Trauma, Narrative, and History.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Carver, Raymond. 1986. ‘On Writing’, in Fires: Essays, Poems, Stories. London:
Picador.
Castle, Terry. 1992. ‘Sylvia Townsend Warner and the Counterplot of Lesbian
Fiction’, in Sexual Sameness: Textual Differences in Lesbian and Gay Writing, ed.
Joseph Bristow. London: Routledge.
Castle, Terry. 1995. The Female Thermometer: Eighteenth-Century Culture and the
Invention of the Uncanny. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Caughie, John, ed. 1981. Theories of Authorship: A Reader. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Cavaliero, Glen. 2005. The Alchemy of Laughter. Houndmills: Palgrave.
Celan, Paul. 1986. Collected Prose, trans. Rosemarie Waldrop. Manchester: Carcanet
Press.
Chambers, Ross. 1984. Story and Situation: Narrative Seduction and the Power of
Fiction. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Chambers, Ross. 1991. Room for Maneuver: Reading (the) Oppositional (in)
Narrative. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chandler, David. 2007. Semiotics: The Basics. 2ndedn. London: Routledge.
Chandler, James. 1998. England in 1819: The Politics of Literary Culture and the
Case of Romantic Historicism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chase, Cynthia. 1986. Decomposing Figures: Rhetorical Readings in the Romantic
Tradition. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Chasseguet-Smirget, Janine. 1985. Creativity and Perversion. Foreword by Otto
Kernberg. London: Free Association Books.
Chatman, Seymour. 1990. Coming to Terms: The Rhetoric of Narrative in Fiction
and Film. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic Structures. S-Gravenhage: Mouton.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 341
Chow, Rey. 2003. Writing Diaspora: Tactics of Intervention in Contemporary
Cultural Studies. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Cixous, Hélène. 1974. ‘The Character of “Character”’, New Literary History, 5:
383–402.
Cixous, Hélène. 1976. ‘Fiction and Its Phantoms: A Reading of Freud’s Das
Unheimliche’, New Literary History, 7: 525–48.
Cixous, Hélène. 1990. ‘The Laugh of the Medusa’, trans. Keith Cohen and Paula
Cohen, in New French Feminisms: An Anthology, eds Elaine Marks and Isabelle de
Courtirvon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Cixous, Hélène. 1993. Three Steps on the Ladder of Writing, trans. Sarah Cornell and
Susan Sellers. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cixous, Hélène. 1998. Stigmata: Escaping Texts, trans. Eric Prenowitz. London and
New York: Routledge.
Cixous, Hélène. 2008. White Ink: Interviews on Sex, Text and Politics, ed. Susan
Sellers. Stocksfield: Acumen.
Claridge, Laura P. and Elizabeth Langland, eds. 1991. Out of Bounds: Male Writers
and Gender(ed) Criticism. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Clark, Timothy. 1997. The Theory of Inspiration: Composition as a Crisis of
Subjectivity in Romantic and Post-Romantic Writing. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Clark, Timothy and Nicholas Royle, eds. 2002. ‘Monstrism’, The Oxford Literary
Review23.
Clark, Timothy. Forthcoming. The Cambridge Introduction to Literature and the
Environment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, Tom. 1994. Anti-Mimesis from Plato to Hitchcock. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Cohn, Dorrit. 1978. Transparent Minds: Narrative Modes for Presenting Conscious-
ness in Fiction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978.
Cohn, Norman. 1970. The Pursuit of the Millennium: Revolutionary Millenarians
and Mystical Anarchists of the Middle Ages. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Colebrook, Claire. 2002. Gilles Deleuze.London and New York: Routledge.
Colebrook, Claire. 2004. Gender. Houndmills: Palgrave.
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. 1975. Biographia Literaria, or Biographical Sketches of
my Literary Life and Opinions, ed. George Watson. London: Dent.
Connor, Steven. 1992. Theory and Cultural Value. Oxford: Blackwell.
Connor, Steven. 1997. Postmodernist Culture: An Introduction to Theories of the
Contemporary, 2ndedn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Connor, Steven. 2000. Dumbstruck – A Cultural History of Ventriloquism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Cordner, Michael, Peter Holland and John Kerrigan, eds. 1994. English Comedy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coupe, Laurence, ed., 2000. The Green Studies Reader: From Romanticism to
Ecocriticism. London: Routledge.342 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Crane, R.S. 1967. ‘History Versus Criticism in the Study of Literature’, in The Idea
of the Humanities and Other Essays Critical and Historical, vol. 2. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Critchley, Simon. 2002. On Humour. London and New York: Routledge.
Culler, Jonathan. 1981. ‘Story and Discourse in the Analysis of Narrative’, in The
Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Culler, Jonathan. 1983. On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism After Structuralism.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Culler, Jonathan, ed. 1988a. On Puns: The Foundation of Letters. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Culler, Jonathan. 1988b. ‘Political Criticism: Confronting Religion’, in Framing the
Sign: Criticism and Its Institutions. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Culler, Jonathan. 1997. Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Culler, Jonathan. 2007. The Literary in Theory. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Cupitt, Don. 1997. After God: The Future of Religion. London: Weidenfeld and
Nicolson.
Currie, Mark, ed. 1995. Metafiction.London: Longman.
Currie, Mark. 1998. Postmodern Narrative Theory. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Curti, Lidia. 1998. Female Stories, Female Bodies: Narrative, Identity and
Representation. London: Macmillan.
Darwin, Charles. 1866. On the Origin of the Species By Means of Natural Selection,
Or, The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, 4thedn, London:
Murray.
Davies, Colin. 2004. After Poststructuralism: Reading, Stories and Theory. London:
Routledge.
Davies, Tony. 1997. Humanism. London: Routledge.
Day, Gary. 1996. Re-Reading F.R. Leavis: Culture and Literary Criticism.
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Dean, CarolynJ. 1992. The Self and Its Pleasures: Bataille, Lacan, and the Historyof
the Decentered Subject. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Decker,James M. 2004. Ideology. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Deitering, Cynthia. 1996. ‘The Postnatal Novel: Toxic Consciousness in Fiction of
the 1980s’. In Glotfelty and Fromm, eds. The Ecocriticism Reader: 196–203.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1986. Cinema 1: The Movement-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and
Barbara Habberjam. London: Athlone Press.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1989. Cinema 2: The Time-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and
Robert Galeta. London: Athlone Press.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1998. ‘Literature and Life’, ‘He Stuttered’ and ‘The Exhausted’, in
Essays Critical and Clinical, trans. Daniel W. Smith and Michael A. Greco.
London: Verso.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 343
Deleuze, Gilles. 2000. ‘The Brain Is the Screen: An Interview with Gilles Deleuze’
[1986], trans. Marie Therese Guirgis, in The Brain Is the Screen: Deleuze and
the Philosophy of Cinema, ed. Gregory Flaxman. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari. 1983. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and
Schizophrenia, trans. Robert Hurley et al. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari. 1986. Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature, trans.
Dana Polan. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
de Man, Paul. 1979. Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche,
Rilke, and Proust. New Haven: Yale University Press.
de Man, Paul. 1983. Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary
Criticism, 2ndedn. London: Methuen.
de Man, Paul. 1984. The Rhetoric of Romanticism. New York: Columbia University
Press.
de Man, Paul. 1986. The Resistance to Theory. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Derrick, Scott S. 1997. Monumental Anxieties: Homoerotic Desire and Feminine
Influence in Nineteenth-Century U.S. Literature. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1976. Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1978. ‘Force and Signification’, in Writing and Difference, trans.
Alan Bass. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Derrida, Jacques. 1979. ‘Living On’, trans. James Hulbert, in Deconstruction and
Criticism, eds Harold Bloom et al. New York: Seabury Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1981. Positions, trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1982. ‘White Mythology’, in Margins of Philosophy, trans. Alan
Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1983. ‘The Principle of Reason: The University in the Eyes of Its
Pupils’, trans. Catherine Porter and Edward P. Morris, in Diacritics, vol. 13, no. 3:
3–20.
Derrida, Jacques. 1984. ‘No Apocalypse, Not Now (full speed ahead, seven missiles,
seven missives)’, trans. Catherine Porter and Philip Lewis, Diacritics, vol. 14,
no. 3: 20–31.
Derrida, Jacques. 1985a. ‘Des Tours de Babel’, trans. Joseph F. Graham, in
Difference in Translation, ed. Graham. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1985b. The Ear of the Other: Otobiography, Transference,
Translation. Texts and Discussions with Jacques Derrida, trans. Peggy Kamuf.
New York: Schocken Books.
Derrida, Jacques. 1986a. Mémoires: for Paul de Man, trans. Cecile Lindsay, Jonathan
Culler and Eduardo Cadava. New York: Columbia University Press.344 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Derrida, Jacques. 1986b. ‘Fors: The Anglish Words of Nicolas Abraham and Maria
Torok’, trans. Barbara Johnson, in Nicolas Abraham and Maria Torok, The Wolf
Man’s Magic Word: A Cryptonymy, trans. Nicholas Rand. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1988. ‘Afterword: Toward an Ethic of Discussion’, trans. Samuel
Weber, in Limited Inc.Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1989. ‘The Ghost Dance: An Interview with Jacques Derrida’,
trans. Jean-Luc Svobada, in Public, no. 2: 60–73.
Derrida, Jacques. 1992a. Acts of Literature, ed. Derek Attridge. London:
Routledge.
Derrida, Jacques. 1992b. ‘Passions: “An Oblique Offering”’, trans. David Wood, in
Derrida: A Critical Reader, ed. David Wood. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Derrida, Jacques. 1992c. ‘Of an Apocalyptic Tone Newly Adopted in Philosophy’,
trans. John P. Leavey, Jr, in Derrida and Negative Theology, eds Harold Coward
and Toby Foshay. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1994. Spectres of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning,
and the New International, trans. Peggy Kamuf. New York: Routledge.
Derrida, Jacques. 1995a. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression, trans. Eric Prenowitz.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1995b. ‘Che cos’è la poesia?’, trans. Peggy Kamuf, in Points...
Interviews, 1974–1994, ed. Elisabeth Weber. Stanford: Standord University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 1998. Monolingualism of the Other; or, The Prosthesis of Origin,
trans. Patrick Mensah. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 2000. Demeure: Fiction and Testimony, trans. Elizabeth Rottenberg.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 2002a. ‘The University Without Condition’, in Without Alibi, ed.,
trans., and with an Introduction by Peggy Kamuf. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 2002b. Acts of Religion, ed. Gil Anidjar. London and New York:
Routledge.
Derrida, Jacques. 2003. ‘Autoimmunity: Real and Symbolic Suicides. A Dialogue
with Jacques Derrida’, trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas, in Giovanna
Borradori, Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with Jürgen Habermas and
Jacques Derrida. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press.
Derrida, Jacques. 2008. The Animal That Therefore I Am. Ed. Marie-Louise Mallet,
trans. David Wills. New York: Fordham University Press.
Derrida, Jacques and Maurizio Ferraris. 2001. A Taste for the Secret, trans. Giacomo
Donis. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Derrida, Jacques and Gianni Vattimo, eds. 1998. Religion. Cambridge: Polity.
Descartes, René. 1977. Discourse on Method and the Meditations, trans. F.E.
Sutcliffe. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
de Vries, Hent. 1999. Philosophy and the Turn to Religion. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 345
Doane, Mary Ann. 2002. The Emergence of Cinematic Time: Modernity, Contingency,
The Archive.Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dobson, Michael. 1992. The Making of the National Poet: Shakespeare, Adaptation
and Authorship, 1660–1769. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Docherty, Thomas. 1983. Reading (Absent) Character: Towards a Theory of
Characterization in Fiction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Docherty, Thomas, ed. 1993. Postmodernism: A Reader, 2ndedn. Hemel Hempstead:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Dolar, Mladen. 1991. ‘“I Shall Be with You on Your Wedding-night”: Lacan and the
Uncanny’, October, vol. 58.
Dolar, Mladen. 1996. ‘The Object Voice’, in Gaze and Voice as Love Objects, eds
Renata Salecl and Slavoj Zizek. Durham: Duke University Press.
Dollimore, Jonathan. 1991. Sexual Dissidence: Augustine to Wilde, Freud to Fou-
cault. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dollimore, Jonathan. 1998. Death, Desire and Loss in Western Culture. London:
Penguin.
Dollimore, Jonathan. 2001. Sex, Literature and Censorship. Cambridge: Polity.
Dollimore, Jonathan. 2004. Radical Tragedy: Religion, Ideology and Power in the
Drama of Shakespeare and his Contemporaries. 3rdedn. Houndmills: Palgrave.
Dollimore, Jonathan and Alan Sinfield, eds. 1994. Political Shakespeare: New Essays
in Cultural Materialism, 2ndedn. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Donaldson, Ian, ed. 1988. Ben Jonson: A Critical Edition of the Major Works. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Drakakis, John, ed. 1992. Shakespearean Tragedy. London: Longman.
Drakakis, John and Naomi Liebler, eds. 1998. Tragedy. London: Longman.
Drolet, Michael. 2003. The Postmodernism Reader. London: Routledge.
During, Simon. 1992. Foucault and Literature: Towards a Genealogy of Writing.
London: Routledge.
Eaglestone, Robert. 2004. The Holocaust and the Postmodern. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Eagleton, Terry. 1976. Marxism and Literary Criticism. London: Routledge.
Eagleton, Terry. 1990. The Ideology of the Aesthetic. Oxford: Blackwell.
Eagleton, Terry. 1991. Ideology: An Introduction. London: Verso.
Eagleton, Terry, ed. 1994. Ideology. London: Longman.
Eagleton, Terry. 1996. Literary Theory: An Introduction, 2nd edn. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Eagleton, Terry. 2003. Sweet Violence: The Idea of the Tragic. Oxford: Blackwell.
Eco, Umberto. 1979. ‘The Poetics of the Open Work’, in The Role of the Reader:
Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Eco, Umberto. 1992. ‘Postmodernism, Irony, the Enjoyable’, in Modernism/Post-
modernism, ed. Peter Brooker. London: Longman.
Eco, Umberto. 1993. ‘The City of Robots’, in Postmodernism: A Reader, ed. Thomas
Docherty. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.346 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Edelman, Lee. 2004. No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive. Durham: Duke
University Press.
Edmundson, Mark. 1990. Towards Reading Freud: Self-Creation in Milton,
Wordsworth, Emerson and Sigmund Freud. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Edwards, Justin. 2008. Postcolonial Literature. Houndmills: Palgrave.
Egan, Gabriel. 2006. Green Shakespeare: From Ecopolitics to Ecocriticism. London:
Routledge.
Elam, Diane. 1992. Romancing the Postmodern. London: Routledge.
Eliot, T.S. 1975. Selected Prose of T.S. Eliot, ed. Frank Kermode. London: Faber and
Faber.
Ellmann, Maud, ed. 1994. Psychoanalytic Literary Criticism. London: Longman.
Empson, William. 1953. Seven Types of Ambiguity, 3rd edn. London: Chatto and
Windus.
Empson, William. 1965. Milton’s God. London: Chatto and Windus.
Esterhammer, Angela. 2000. The Romantic Performative: Language and Action in
British and German Romanticism. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Fanon, Frantz. 1967. The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Felman, Shoshana. 1983. The Literary Speech Act: Don Juan with J.L. Austin, or
Seduction in Two Languages, trans. Catherine Porter. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Felman, Shoshana. 1987. Jacques Lacan and the Adventure of Insight: Psychoanalysis
in Contemporary Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Felman, Shoshana. 1993. What Does a Woman Want? Reading and Sexual Difference.
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Felman, Shoshana. 2003. The Scandal of the Speaking Body: Don Juan with J.L.
Austin or, Seduction in Two Languages, trans. Catherine Porter. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Felman, Shoshana and Dori Laub. 1992. Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in
Literature, Psychoanalysis and History. New York: Routledge.
Felski, Rita. 2003. Literature After Feminism. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Felski, Rita, ed. 2008. Rethinking Tragedy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Fetterley, Judith. 1978. The Resisting Reader: A Feminist Approach to American
Fiction. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Fineman, Joel. 1991. The Subjectivity Effect in Western Literary Tradition: Essays
Toward the Release of Shakespeare’s Will. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fink, Bruce. 1996. ‘Reading Hamlet with Lacan’, in Willy Apollon and Richard
Feldstein, eds, Lacan, Politics, Aesthetics. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Finkelstein, David and Alistair McCleery, eds. 2006. The Book History Reader. 2nd
edn. London: Longman.
Fish, Stanley. 1980. Is There A Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive
Communities. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 347
Floyd-Wilson, Mary, and Garrett A. Sullivan, Jr,. 2007. Environment and
Embodiment in Early Modern England. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Forrester, John. 1990. The Seductions of Psychoanalysis: Freud, Lacan and Derrida.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forster, E.M. 1976. Aspects of the Novel. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foster, Jeanette H. 1958. Sex Variant Women in Literature: A Historical and
Quantitative Survey. London: Frederick Muller.
Foucault, Michel. 1970. The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences.
New York: Random House.
Foucault, Michel. 1979. ‘What Is an Author?’ in Textual Strategies: Perspectives in
Post-Structuralist Criticism, ed. Josué V. Harari. London: Methuen.
Foucault, Michel. 1980a. ‘The History of Sexuality: Interview’, trans. Geoff
Bennington, in Oxford Literary Review, vol. 4, no. 2: 3–14.
Foucault, Michel. 1980b. Introduction to Herculine Barbin: Being the Recently
Discovered Memoirs of a Nineteenth-Century French Hermaphrodite, trans.
Richard McDougall. New York: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, Michel. 1981. The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, trans. Robert
Hurley. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Foucault, Michel. 1983. ‘The Subject and Power’, in Michel Foucault: Beyond
Structuralism and Hermeneutics, eds Hubert L. Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1985. The Use of Pleasure (The History of Sexuality, vol. 2).
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Fowler, Roger. 1986. Linguistic Criticism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeden, Michael. 2003. Ideology: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Freud, Sigmund. 1957a. ‘The Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words’ (1910), in The
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. XI,
trans. James Strachey. London: Hogarth.
Freud, Sigmund. 1957b. ‘Findings, Ideas, Problems’, in The Standard Edition of
the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. XXIII, trans. James
Strachey. London: Hogarth.
Freud, Sigmund. 1976. Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious(1905), in Pelican
Freud Library, vol. 6, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1977. On Sexuality: Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality(1905),
in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 7, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1984. ‘Beyond the Pleasure Principle’, in Pelican Freud Library,
vol. 11, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985a. ‘Thoughts for the Times on War and Death’ (1915),
in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 12, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985b. ‘The “Uncanny”’ (1919), in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 14,
trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.348 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Freud, Sigmund. 1985c. ‘A Seventeenth-Century Demonological Neurosis’ (1923),
in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 14, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985d. ‘Humour’ (1927), in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 14, trans.
James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985e. ‘Civilization and Its Discontents’ (1930), in Pelican Freud
Library, vol. 12, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985f. ‘Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming’, in Pelican Freud
Library, vol. 14, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985g. ‘Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of his Childhood’, in
Pelican Freud Library, vol. 14, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1985h. ‘Psychopathic Characters on the Stage’, in Pelican Freud
Library, vol. 14, trans. James Strachey. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 1986. ‘Psychoanalysis’ (1923) and ‘The Resistances to
Psychoanalysis’ (1925), in Pelican Freud Library, vol. 15, trans. James Strachey.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Freud, Sigmund. 2003. The Uncanny, trans. David McLintock, with an Introduction
by Hugh Haughton. London: Penguin.
Freund, Elizabeth. 1987. The Return of the Reader: Reader-Response Criticism.
London: Methuen.
Fudge, Erica. 2002. Perceiving Animals: Humans and Beasts in Early Modern
English Culture. Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Fuss, Diana. 1995. Identification Papers. New York: Routledge.
Fuss, Diana, ed. 1996. Human, All Too Human. New York: Routledge.
Fussell, Paul. 1975. The Great War and Modern Memory. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gallagher, Catherine and Stephen Greenblatt. 2000. Practising New Historicism.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Garrard, Greg. 2004. Ecocriticism. London: Routledge.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr, ed. 1984. Black Literature and Literary Theory. London:
Methuen.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr, ed. 1986. ‘Race’, Writing, and Difference. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr, 1988. The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of Afro-American
Literary Criticism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr, 1992. Loose Canons: Notes on the Culture Wars. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Gee, Henry. 1996. ‘How Humans Behaved Before they Behaved like Humans’.
London Review of Books18: 21 (31 October): 36–8.
Genette, Gérard. 1986. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method, trans. Jane E.
Lewin. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Genette, Gérard. 1987. Seuils. Paris: Seuil.
Gerstner, David A. and Janet Staiger, eds. 2003. Authorship and Film. New York:
Routledge.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 349
Giffney, Noreen and Myra J. Hird, eds. 2008. Queering the Non/Human.Aldershot:
Ashgate.
Gibson, Andrew. 1996. Towards a Postmodern Theory of Narrative. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Gilbert, Sandra M. and Susan Gubar. 1979. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman
Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagination. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Girard, René. 1965. Deceit, Desire, and the Novel: Self and Other in Literary
Structure, trans. Yvonne Freccero. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Girard, René. 1986. ‘Hamlet’s Dull Revenge’, in Literary Theory / Renaissance Texts,
eds. Patricia Parker and David Quint. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Glotfelty, Cheryll and Harold Fromm, eds. 1996. The Ecocriticism Reader:
Landmarks in Literary Ecology. Athens: The University of Georgia Press.
Glover, David and Cora Kaplan. 2000. Genders. London: Routledge.
Glut, D.F. 1984. The Frankenstein Catalogue. Jefferson NC: McFarland.
Goldberg, David Theo. 2002. The Racial State.Oxford: Blackwell.
Graham, Elaine L. 2002. Representations of the Post/Human: Monsters, Aliens and
Others in Popular Culture. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Gray, Frances. 1994. Women and Laughter. London: Macmillan.
Gray, John. 2002. Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals. London:
Granta Books.
Green, André. 1979. The Tragic Effect: The Oedipus Complex in Tragedy, trans. Alan
Sheridan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Greenblatt, Stephen. 1988. Shakespearean Negotiations: The Circulation of Social
Energy in Renaissance England. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Greenblatt, Stephen. 1990a. ‘Toward a Poetics of Culture’, in Learning to Curse:
Essays in Early Modern Culture. London: Routledge.
Greenblatt, Stephen. 1990b. ‘Culture’, in Critical Terms for Literary Study, eds
Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Greenblatt, Stephen. 1991. Marvelous Possessions: The Wonder of the New World.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gregson, Ian. 2004. Postmodern Literature. London: Arnold.
Griffiths, Eric. 1989. The Printed Voice of Victorian Poetry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gubar, Susan. 2003. Poetry After Auschwitz: Remembering What One Never Knew.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Guillory, John. 1993. Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Gutting, Gary. 2005. Foucault: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hall, Donald E. 2003. Queer Theories. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Halperin, David. 1990. One Hundred Years of Homosexuality and Other Essays on
Greek Love. New York: Routledge.
Halperin, David. 2002. How to Do the History of Homosexuality. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.350 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Hamilton, Paul. 1996. Historicism. London: Routledge.
Harari, Josué V. 1979. ‘Critical Factions/Critical Fictions’, in Textual Strategies:
Perspectives in Post-Structuralist Criticism, ed. Josué V. Harari. London:
Methuen.
Haraway, Donna. 1985. ‘A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-
Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century’, reprinted in Badmington, ed.,
Posthumanism.
Harrison, Nicholas. 2003. Postcolonial Criticism: History, Theory and the Work of
Fiction. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hartman, Geoffrey H. 1981. ‘Words and Wounds’, in Saving the Text: Literature/
Derrida/Philosophy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hartman, Geoffrey. 2002. Scars of the Spirit: The Struggle Against Inauthenticity.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hassan, Ihab. 1989. ‘Beyond Postmodernism? Theory, Sense, and Pragmatism’,
in Making Sense: The Role of the Reader in Contemporary American Fiction, ed.
Gerard Hoffmann. München: Wilhelm Fink.
Hawkes, David. 1996. Ideology. London: Routledge.
Hawkes, Terence. 1972. Metaphor. London: Methuen.
Hawley, John C., ed. 2001. Postcolonial Queer: Theoretical Intersections.
Hazlitt, William. 1910. ‘On Shakespeare and Milton’, in Lectures on the English Poets
and The Spirit of the Age. London: Dent.
Heffernan, James A.W. 1993. Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from
Homer to Ashbery. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time, trans. John Macquarrie and Edward
Robinson. New York: Harper.
Heidegger, Martin. 1967. What Is A Thing?trans. W.B. Barton, Jr and Vera Deutsch.
Chicago: Henry Regnery.
Heidegger, Martin. 1977. ‘The Word of Nietzsche: “God Is Dead”’, ‘The Question
Concerning Technology’, in The Question Concerning Technology and Other
Essays, trans. William Lovitt. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Heidegger, Martin. 2001. ‘The Thing’, in Poetry, Language, Thought, trans. Albert
Hofstadter. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.
Hemingway, Ernest. 2000. ‘Ernest Hemingway: An Interview’, in The Norton
Anthology of Short Fiction. New York: Norton.
Henderson, Mae Gwendolyn. 1993. ‘Speaking in Tongues: Dialogics, Dialectics and
the Black Woman Writer’s Literary, Tradition’, in Colonial Discourse and Post-
Colonial Theory: A Reader, eds Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman. Hemel
Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Herman, David, ed. 2007. The Cambridge Companion to Narrative. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Herman, David, Manfred John, and Marie-Laure Ryan, eds. 2005. The Routledge
Encyclopaedia of Narrative Theory. London: Routledge.
Hertz, Neil. 1979. ‘Freud and the Sandman’, in Textual Strategies: Perspectives in
Post-Structuralist Criticism, ed. Josué V. Harari. London: Methuen.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 351
Hirst, Paul and Penny Woolley. 1982. Social Relations and Human Attributes.
London: Tavistock.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1840. The English Works of Thomas Hobbes, ed. Sir William
Molesworth, vol. IV. London: John Bohn.
Holland, Norman N. 1980. ‘Unity Identity Text Self’, in Reader-Response Criticism:
From Formalism to Post-Structuralism, ed. Jane P. Tompkins, Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Hollander, John. 1985. Vision and Resonance: Two Senses of Poetic Form, 2ndedn.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Homans, Margaret. 1994. ‘Feminist Fictions and Feminist Theories of Narrative’,
in Narrative2: 3–16.
Hough, Graham. 1967. The Romantic Poets, 3rdedn. London: Hutchinson.
Horkheimer, Max and Theodor W. Adorno. 2002. Dialectic of Enlightenment:
Philosophical Fragments, trans. Gunzelin Schmid Noerr and Edmund Jephcott.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hughes, Ted. 1967. Poetry in the Making. London: Faber.
Hurley, Kelly. 1996. The Gothic Body: Sexuality, Materialism, and Degeneration at
the Fin de Siècle. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hutcheon, Linda. 1988. A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, Fiction.
London: Routledge.
Hutcheon, Linda. 1989. The Politics of Postmodernism. London: Routledge.
Hynes, Samuel. 1990. A War Imagined: The First World War and English Culture.
London: Bodley Head.
Irigaray, Luce. 1977. ‘Women’s Exile’, in Ideology and Consciousness, no. 1: 62–76.
Irigaray, Luce. 1985. ‘This Sex Which Is Not One’, in This Sex Which Is Not One,
trans. Catherine Porter and Carolyn Burke. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Irvine, William. 2005. On Desire: Why We Want What We Want. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Iser, Wolfgang. 1995. ‘Interaction Between Text and Reader’, in Readers and
Reading, ed. Andrew Bennett. London: Longman.
Irwin, William. 1999. Intentionalist Interpretation: A Philosophical Explanationand
Defense. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press.
Irwin, William, ed. 2002. The Death and Resurrection of the Author?Westport, CN:
Greenwood Press.
Jacobus, Mary. 1986. Reading Woman: Essays in Feminist Criticism. London:
Methuen.
Jakobson, Roman. 1960. ‘Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics’, in Style in
Language, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
James, Henry. 1986. The Art of Criticism: Henry James on the Theory and Practice of
Fiction, eds William Veeder and Susan M. Griffin. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Jameson, Fredric. 1988. ‘The Politics of Theory: Ideological Positions in the
Postmodernism Debate’, in David Lodge, ed., Modern Literary Theory. London:
Longman.352 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Jameson, Fredric. 1992. ‘Postmodernism and Consumer Society’, in Modernism/
Postmodernism, ed. Peter Brooker. London: Longman.
Jameson, Fredric. 1993. ‘Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism’,
in Postmodernism: A Reader, ed. Thomas Docherty. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Jay, Martin. 1993. The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century French Thought.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Jencks, Charles. 1993. ‘The Emergent Rules’, in Postmodernism: A Reader, ed.
Thomas Docherty. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Johnson, Samuel. 1969. Dr Johnson on Shakespeare, ed. W.K. Wimsatt.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Jolly, Roslyn. 1993. Henry James: History, Narrative, Fiction. Oxford: Clarendon.
Jones, Ernest. 1953–7. Sigmund Freud: Life and Work. London: Hogarth.
Judovitz, Dalia. 1988. Subjectivity and Representation in Descartes: The Origins of
Modernity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1988. The Critique of Judgement, trans. James Creed Meredith.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kendall, Tim. ed. 2007. The Oxford Companion to British and Irish War Poetry.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kermode, Frank. 1967. The Sense of an Ending: Studies in the Theory of Fiction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kermode, Frank. 1975. The Classic. London: Faber and Faber.
Kermode, Frank. 1979. The Genesis of Secrecy: On the Interpretation of Narrative.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kermode, Frank. 1983. ‘Secrets and Narrative Sequence’, in Essays on Fiction
1971–82. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Kerridge, Richard and Neil Sammells, eds. 1998. Writing the Environment:
Ecocriticism and Literature. London: Zed Books.
Kittler, Friedrich. 1997. ‘Romanticism – Psychoanalysis – Film: A History of
the Double’, in Literature, Media, Information Systems, ed. John Johnston.
Amsterdam: G +B Arts International.
Knight, Stephen. 1980. Form and Ideology in Detective Fiction. London: Macmillan.
Knopp, Sherron E. 1992. ‘“If I saw you would you kiss me?”: Sapphism and
the Subversiveness of Virginia Woolf’s Orlando’, in Sexual Sameness: Textual
Differences in Lesbian and Gay Writing, ed. Joseph Bristow. London: Routledge.
Knowles, Murray and Rosamund Moon. 2006. Introducing Metaphor. London:
Routledge.
Koestler, Arthur. 1964. The Act of Creation. London: Hutchinson.
Kolodny, Annette. 1996. ‘Unearthing Herstory: An Introduction’. In Cheryll
Glotfelty and Harold Fromm, eds. The Ecocriticism Reader: Landmarks in
Literary Ecology. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Kramnick, Jonathan Brody. 1998. Making the English Canon: Print-capitalism and
the Cultural Past, 1700–1770. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 353
Krieger, Murray. 1992. Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Kristeva, Julia. 1986. ‘Word, Dialogue and Novel’, in The Kristeva Reader, ed. Toril
Moi. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Kristeva, Julia. 1991. Strangers to Ourselves, trans. Leon C. Roudiez. Hemel
Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Lacan, Jacques. 1977a. Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan. London:
Tavistock.
Lacan, Jacques. 1977b. ‘Desire and the Interpretation of Desire in Hamlet’, trans.
James Hulbert, Yale French Studies, no. 55/56. Literature and Psychoanalysis. The
Question of Reading: Otherwise, ed. Shoshana Felman.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Lane, Christopher. 1995. The Ruling Passion: British Colonial Allegory and the
Paradox of Homosexual Desire. Durham: Duke University Press.
Leavis, F.R. 1948. The Great Tradition. London: Chatto and Windus.
Leavis, F.R. 1972. Revaluation: Tradition and Development in English Poetry.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Leavis, F.R. and Denys Thompson. 1964. Culture and Environment: The Training
of Critical Awareness. London: Chatto and Windus.
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques. 1990. The Violence of Language. London: Routledge.
Lentricchia, Frank and Andrew DuBois. 2003. Close Reading: The Reader. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.
Levi, Primo. 1987. If This Is A Manand The Truce, trans. Stuart Woolf. London:
Abacus.
Levi, Primo. 1989. The Drowned and the Saved, trans. Raymond Rosenthal. New
York: Vintage.
Leys, Ruth. 2000. Trauma: A Genealogy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lippit, Akira Mazuta. 2000. Electric Animal: Toward a Rhetoric of Wildlife.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Littau, Karin. 2006. Theories of Reading: Books, Bodies and Bibliomania. Cambridge:
Polity.
Liu, Alan. 1989. Wordsworth:The Sense of History. Stanford: Standord University
Press.
Loomba, Ania. 1998. Colonialism/Postcolonialism. London: Routledge.
Luckhurst, Roger. 2008. The Trauma Question. London: Routledge.
Lyotard, Jean-François. 1984. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge,
trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.
Lyotard, Jean-François. 1992. ‘Answering the Question: What is Postmodernism?’
in Modernism/Postmodernism, ed. Peter Brooker. London: Longman.
Lyotard, Jean-François. 1997. Postmodern Fables, trans. Georges van den Abbeele.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.354 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
MacCabe, Colin. 2003. ‘On Impurity: the Dialectics of Cinema and Literature’, in
Literature and Visual Technologies: Writing After Cinema, ed. Julian Murphet and
Lydia Rainford. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Macherey, Pierre. 1978. A Theory of Literary Production, trans. Geoffrey Wall.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Machor, James L., ed. 1993. Readers in History: Nineteenth-Century American
Literature and the Contexts of Response. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Mahony, Patrick J. 1987. Freud as a Writer, expanded edition. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Mahood, M.M. 1957. Shakespeare’s Wordplay. London: Methuen.
Manguel, Alberto. 1997. A History of Reading. London: HarperCollins.
Mansfield, Katherine. 1930. Novels and Novelists, ed. Middleton Murry. London:
Constable.
Marcus, Laura. 2007. The Tenth Muse: Writing About Cinema in the Modernist
Period. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Margolis, Uri. 2007. ‘Character’. In Herman, ed., The Cambridge Companion to
Narrative.
Marriott, David. 2000. On Black Men. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh Press.
Martin, Wallace. 1986. Recent Theories of Narrative. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Marx, Karl. 1973. Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy,
trans. Martin Nicolaus. London: Allen Lane.
Marx, Karl. 1976. The German Ideology, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected
Works, vol. 5. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
McGann, Jerome J. 1985. The Beauty of Inflections: Literary Investigations in
Historical Method and Theory. Oxford: Clarendon.
McQuillan, Martin, ed. 2000. The Narrative Reader. London: Routledge.
Melville, Stephen. 1986. Philosophy Beside Itself: On Deconstruction and Modernism.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Melville, Stephen and Bill Readings, eds. 1995. Vision and Textuality. Basingstoke:
Macmillan.
Meltzer, Françoise. 1994. Hot Property: The Stakes and Claims of Literary
Originality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miller, D.A. 1981. Narrative and its Discontents: Problems of Closure in the
Traditional Novel. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Miller, D.A. 1989. ‘“Cage aux folles”: Sensation and Gender in Wilkie Collins’s The
Woman in White’, in Speaking of Gender, ed. E. Showalter. London: Routledge.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1963. The Disappearance of God: Five Nineteenth-Century Writers.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1980. ‘The Figure in the Carpet’, in Poetics Today1, 3: 107–18.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1982. ‘Wuthering Heights: Repetition and the “Uncanny”’, in Fiction
and Repetition: Seven English Novels. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 355
Miller, J. Hillis. 1987. The Ethics of Reading: Kant, de Man, Eliot, Trollope, James,
and Benjamin. New York: Columbia University Press.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1990. ‘Narrative’, in Critical Term for Literary Study, eds Frank
Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1991. ‘Thomas Hardy, Jacques Derrida, and the “Dislocation of
Souls”’, in Tropes, Parables, Performatives: Essays in Twentieth-Century Literature.
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1992. Ariadne’s Thread: Story Lines. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Miller, J. Hillis. 1994. ‘Derrida’s Topographies’, in South Atlantic Review, 59, 1:
1–25.
Miller, J. Hillis. 2000. ‘Deconstruction and a Poem’, in Deconstructions: A User’s
Guide, ed. Nicholas Royle. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Miller, J. Hillis. 2001. Speech Acts in Literature. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Miller, J. Hillis. 2002. On Literature. London:Routledge.
Millett, Kate. 1969. Sexual Politics. London: Rupert Hart-Davis.
Mills, Sara, ed. 1994. Gendering the Reader. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Mills, Sara. 2003. Michel Foucault. London: Routledge.
Mitchell, W.J.T. 1986. Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Mitchell, W.J.T. 1994. Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Moi, Toril. 1985. Sexual/Textual Politics: Feminist Literary Theory. London: Routledge.
Monbiot, George. 2004. ‘Born Yesterday’ (review for the Guardiannewspaper of The
Day After Tomorrow). www.monbiot.com/archives/2004/05/14/born-yesterday/
Monbiot, George. 2007. ‘The Road Well Travelled’ (review for the Guardiannews-
paper of Cormac McCarthy’s The Road). www.monbiot.com/archives/2007/10/
30/the-road-well-travelled/
Montag, Warren. 2003. Louis Althusser. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Morrison, Toni. 1993. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination.
London: Picador.
Morton, Timothy. 2007. Ecology Without Nature: Rethinking Environmental
Aesthetics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mulhern, Francis, ed. 1992. Contemporary Marxist Literary Criticism. London:
Longman.
Mulvey, Laura. 2006. Death 24x a Second: Stillness and the Moving Image. London:
Reaktion Books.
Münsterberg, Hugo. 1916. The Photoplay: A Psychological Study.New York: Appleton.
Munt, Sally, ed. 1992. New Lesbian Criticism: Literary and Cultural Readings.
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Murphet, Julian and Lydia Rainford. 2003. ‘Introduction’, Literature and Visual
Technologies: Writing After Cinema, eds. Murphet and Rainford. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.356 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. ‘What is it Like to be a Bat?’ Philosophical Review 83:4.
435–50.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 1987. ‘Wild Laughter in the Throat of Death’, in Modern Language
Notes, vol. 102, no. 4: 719–36.
Nancy, Jean-Luc. 1993. ‘Laughter, Presence’, in The Birth to Presence, trans. Brian
Holmes et al. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Nero, Brian. 2003. Race. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Newton, K.M. 2008. Modern Literature and the Tragic. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Nicholls, Peter. 1996. ‘The Belated Postmodern: History, Phantoms and Toni
Morrison’, in Sue Vice, ed., Psychoanalytic Criticism: A Reader. Oxford: Polity.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968. The Will to Power, trans. Walter Kaufmann and R.J.
Hollingdale. New York: Vintage.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1980. ‘On Truth and Lie in an Extra-Moral Sense’, in The
Portable Nietzsche, ed. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1989. Beyond Good and Evil: Prelude to a Philosophy of the
Future, trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Vintage.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 2003. Twilight of the Idols and The Anti-Christ, trans. R.J.
Hollingdale. London: Penguin.
Nuttall, A.D. 1992. Openings: Narrative Beginnings from the Epic to the Novel.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nuttall, A.D. 1996. Why Does Tragedy Give Pleasure?Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Orr, Mary. 2003. Intertextuality: Debates and Contexts. Oxford: Polity.
Partridge, Eric. 2001. Shakespeare’s Bawdy. London and New York: Routledge.
Pask, Kevin. 1996. The Emergence of the English Author: Scripting the Life in Early
Modem England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pater, Walter. The Renaissance. New York: Modern Library, 1919.
Patterson, Annabel. 1990. ‘Intention’, in Critical Terms for Literary Study, eds
Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Payne, Michael, ed. 2005. The Greenblatt Reader. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pfister, Manfred, ed. 2002. A History of English Laughter: Laughter from Beowulf to
Beckett and Beyond, ed Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Phelan, James, ed. 1989. Reading Narrative: Form, Ethics, Ideology. Columbus:
Ohio State University Press.
Phelan, James, and Peter Rabinowitz, eds. 2005. A Companion to Narrative Theory.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Pinker, Steven. 1995. The Language Instinct: The New Science of Language and
Mind. London: Penguin.
Pittock, Malcolm. 2001. ‘The War Poetry of Wilfred Owen: A Dissenting Reappraisal’,
in The Literature of the Great War Reconsidered: Beyond Modern Memory ed.
Patrick J. Quinn and Steven Trout. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Plato. 1961. The Collected Dialogues of Plato, Including the Letters, eds Edith
Hamilton and Huntington Cairns. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 357
Politzer, Heinz. 2006. Freud and Tragedy, trans. Michael Mitchell. Riverside, CA:
Ariadne Press.
Price, Martin. 1983. Forms of Life: Character and Moral Imagination in the Novel.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Prince, Gerald. 2004. A Dictionary of Narratology. 2ndedn. Nebraska: University of
Nebraska Press.
Procter, James, ed. 2000. Writing Black Britain 1948–1998: An Interdisciplinary
Anthology. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Procter, James. 2003. Dwelling Places: Postwar Black British Writing. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.
Punter, David. 1996. The Literature of Terror, 2ndedn, 2 vols. London: Longman.
Punter, David. 2008. Metaphor. London: Routledge.
Punter, David and Glennis Byron. 2003. The Gothic. Oxford: Blackwell.
Quinn, Arthur. 1993. Figures of Speech: 60 Ways to Turn a Phrase. Davis, CA:
Hermagoras Press.
Rabaté, Jean-Michel. 1996. The Ghosts of Modernity. Gainesville: Florida University
Press.
Rabaté, Jean-Michel. 2001. Jacques Lacan.Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rashkin, Esther. 1992. Family Secrets and the Psychoanalysis of Narrative. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rashkin, Esther. 2008. Unspeakable Secrets and the Psychoanalysis of Culture.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Raven, James, Helen Small and Naomi Tadmor, eds. 1995. The Practice and
Representation of Reading in England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Readings, Bill and Bennet Schaber, eds. 1993. Postmodernism Across the Ages.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Regan, Stephen, ed. 1992. The Politics of Pleasure: Aesthetics and Cultural Theory.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Regan, Tom. The Case for Animal Rights. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1983.
Rich, Adrienne. 1986. ‘Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence’, in
Blood, Bread, and Poetry: Selected Prose, 1979–1985. London: Virago.
Ricks, Christopher. 1984. ‘William Wordsworth 1: “A pure organic pleasure from
the lines”’, in The Force of Poetry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ricks, Christopher. 2002. Allusion to the Poets. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1978. The Rule of Metaphor: Multi-Disciplinary Studies of the Creation
of Meaning in Language, trans. Robert Czerny. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Ridley, Matt. 1994. The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. London:
Penguin.
Riley, Denise. 1988. ‘Am I That Name?’: Feminism and the Category of ‘Women’in
History. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Rimmon-Kenan, Shlomith. 2002. Narrative Fiction, 2nd edn. London and New
York: Routledge.
Robson, Mark. 2008. Stephen Greenblatt. London: Routledge.358 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Rogin, Michael. 1994. ‘Sucking Up’. London Review of Books, 16, 9 (12 May): 26.
Ronell, Avital. 1989. The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric Speech.
Lincoln: Nebraska University Press.
Rorty, Amélie Oksenberg, ed. 2001. The Many Faces of Evil: Historical Perspectives.
London and New York: Routledge.
Rose,Jacqueline. 1993. Why War? Oxford: Blackwell.
Rose,Jacqueline. 1996. States of Fantasy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rose, Mark. 1993. Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Rosen, Philip. 2001. Change Mummified: Cinema, Historicity, Theory. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota.
Ross, Thomas W. 1972. Chaucer’s Bawdy. New York: Dutton.
Ross, Trevor. 1998. The Making of the English Literary Canon: From the Middle Ages
to the Late Eighteenth Century. Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press.
Royle, Nicholas. 1991. Telepathy and Literature: Essays on the Reading Mind.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Royle, Nicholas. 2003. The Uncanny. Manchester and New York: Manchester
University Press/Routledge.
Rushdie, Salman. 1990. Is Nothing Sacred?Cambridge: Granta.
Russell, Bertrand. 1968. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols. London:
George Allen and Unwin.
Russett, Margaret. 2006. Fictions and Fakes: Romantic Authenticity, 1760–1845.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ryan, Kiernan, ed. 1996. New Historicism and Cultural Materialism: A Reader.
London: Arnold.
Sacks, Oliver. 1991. Seeing Voices: A Journey into the World of the Deaf. London:
Picador.
Said, Edward W. 1975. Beginnings: Intention and Method. New York: Basic Books.
Said, Edward W. 1978. Orientalism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Said, Edward W. 1983. The World, the Text, and the Critic. London: Faber and
Faber.
Said, Edward W. 1993. Culture and Imperialism. London: Chatto and Windus.
St Clair, William. 2007. The Reading Nation in the Romantic Period. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Saunders, Barry. 1995. Sudden Glory: Laughter as Subversive History. Boston:
Beacon.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. 1974. Course in General Linguistics, ed. Charles Bally and
Albert Sechehayne, trans. Wade Baskin, with an introduction by Jonathan Culler.
London: Fontana.
Scaggs, John. 2005. Crime Fiction. London: Routledge.
Scheese, Don. 1996. ‘Desert Solitaire: Counter-Friction to the Machine in the
Garden’. in Glotfelty and Fromm, eds. The Ecocriticism Reader: 303–22.
Schwartz, Daniel R. 1999. Imagining the Holocaust. Basingstoke: Macmillan.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 359
Schwartz, Hillel. 1996. The Culture of the Copy: Striking Likenesses, Unreasonable
Facsimiles. New York: Zone Books.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 1985. Between Men: English Literature and Male
Homosocial Desire. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 1991. Epistemology of the Closet. Hemel Hempstead:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 1994. Tendencies. London: Routledge.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 2003. Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity.
Durham: Duke University Press.
Sherry, Vincent, ed. 2005. The Cambridge Companion to the Literature of the First
World War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shklovsky, Viktor. 1965. ‘Art as Technique’, in Russian Formalist Criticism: Four
Essays, eds Lee T. Lemon and Marion J. Reis. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.
Showalter, Elaine. 1977. A Literature of Their Own: British Women Novelists from
Brontë to Lessing. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Showalter, Elaine, ed. 1989. Speaking of Gender.London: Routledge.
Showalter, Elaine. 1991. Sexual Anarchy: Gender and Culture at the Fin de Siècle.
London: Virago.
Showalter, Elaine. 1993. ‘On Hysterical Narrative’, in Narrative, 1, 1: 24–35.
Sim, Stuart, ed. 2004. The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism. London:
Routledge.
Simmons, Lawrence and Philip Armstrong, eds. 2007. Knowing Animals. Leiden
and Boston: Brill.
Sinfield, Alan. 1994. Cultural Politics – Queer Reading. London: Routledge.
Sinfield, Alan. 1994. The Wilde Century: Effeminacy, Oscar Wilde and the Queer
Moment. London: Cassell.
Singer, Peter. 1990. Animal Liberation.2ndedition. London: Cape.
Singh, Amardeep. 2006. Literary Secularism: Religion and Modernity in Twentieth-
Century Fiction. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Smith, Adam. 1986. The Wealth of Nations, Books I–III, ed. Andrew Skinner.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Smith, Angela, ed. and introd. 1997. Wide Sargasso Sea. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. 1968. Poetic Closure: A Study of How Poems End.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. 1981. ‘Narrative Versions, Narrative Theories’, in On
Narrative, ed. W.J.T. Mitchell. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. 1988. Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives for
Critical Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Smith, Bruce R. 1994. Homosexual Desire in Shakespeare’s England: A Cultural
Poetics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, Grahame. 2003. Dickens and the Dream of Cinema. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.360 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
Smith, Marquard and Joanne Morra, eds. 2006. The Prosthetic Impulse: From a
Posthuman Present to a Biocultural Future. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Spargo, Tamsin, ed. 2000. Reading the Past: Literature and History. Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1987. In Other Worlds: Essays in Cultural Politics.
London: Routledge.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1999. A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Towards a
History of the VanishingPresent. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Steiner, George. 1961. The Death of Tragedy. London: Faber.
Steeves, H. Peter, ed. 1999. Animal Others: On Ethics, Ontology, and Animal Life.
Albany, NY: State University ofNew York Press.
Stevens, Wallace. 1951. The Necessary Angel: Essays on Reality and the Imagination.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Stewart, Garrett. 1984. Death Sentences: Styles of Dying in British Fiction. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Stewart, Garrett. 1990. Reading Voices: Literature and the Phonotext. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Still, Judith and Michael Worton, eds. 1990. Intertextuality: Theories and Practices.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Suleiman, Susan R. and Inge Crosman, eds. 1980. The Reader in the Text: Essays on
Audience and Interpretation. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sullivan, Nikki. 2001. A Critical Introduction to Queer Theory.Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Sword, Helen. 2001. Ghostwriting Modernism. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Sypher, Wylie, ed. 1956. Comedy. New York: Doubleday.
Syrotinski, Michael. 2007. Deconstruction and the Postcolonial: At the Limits of
Theory. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Tatum, James. 2003. The Mourner’s Song: War and Remembrance from the Iliad to
Vietnam. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, Charles. 1989. Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, Gary. 1990. Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History from the
Restoration to the Present. London: Hogarth.
Thieme, John. 2001. Postcolonial Con-texts: Writing Back to the Canon. London:
Continuum.
Thomas, Keith. 1971. Religion and the Decline of Magic: Studies in Popular Beliefs in
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century England. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Thomas, Sophie. 2008. Romanticism and Visuality: Fragments, History, Spectacle.
London: Routledge.
Thomson, Alex. 2007. ‘Derrida’s Rogues: Islam and the Futures of Deconstruction’,
in Derrida: Negotiating the Legacy, ed. Madeleine Fagan, Ludovic Glorieux,
Indira Hasimbegovic and Marie Suetsugu. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 361
Todd, Jane Marie. 1986. ‘The Veiled Woman in Freud’s Das Unheimliche’, in Signs
2/3: 519–28.
Todd, Janet. 1988. Feminist Literary History: A Defence. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1981. Introduction to Poetics, trans. Richard Howard, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Todorov, Tzvetan. 1993. On Human Diversity. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard
University Press.
Touval, Yonatan. 1997. ‘Colonial Queer Something’, in Queer Forster, eds Robert K.
Martin and George Piggford. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Trotter, David. 2007. Cinema and Modernism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Veeser, H. Aram, ed. 1989. The New Historicism. New York: Routledge.
Veeser, H. Aram, ed. 1994. The New Historicism Reader. New York: Routledge.
Veyne, Paul. 1988. Did the Greeks Believe in their Myths? An Essay on the Constitutive
Imagination, trans. Paula Wissing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vickers, Brian, ed. 1981. Shakespeare: The Critical Heritage, Volume 6, 1774–1801.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Walder, Dennis. 1998. Post-Colonial Literatures in English: History, Language,
Theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Waller, Marguerite. 1987. ‘Academic Tootsie: The Denial of Difference and the
Difference It Makes’, in Diacritics, vol. 17, no. 1: 2–20.
Ward, Graham. 1996. Theology and Contemporary Critical Theory. London:
Macmillan.
Warhol, Robyn R. and Diane Price Herndl, eds. 1997. Feminisms: An Anthology of
Literary Theory and Criticism, revised edn. London: Macmillan.
Watson, Robert N. 2006. Back to Nature: The Green and the Real in the Late
Renaissance. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Weber, Samuel. 1973. ‘The Sideshow, or: Remarks on a Canny Moment’, in Modern
Language Notes, 88: 1102–33.
Weber, Samuel. 1987. ‘Laughing in the Meanwhile’, in Modern Language Notes, vol.
102, no. 4: 691–706.
Weber, Samuel. 1992. The Return to Freud: Jacques Lacan and the Dislocations of
Psychoanalysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, Samuel. 2000. ‘Uncanny Thinking’, in The Legend of Freud, expanded edi-
tion. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Weeks, Jeffrey. 1998. ‘Introduction to Guy Hocquengham’s Homosexual Desire’, in
Literary Theory: An Anthology, eds Julie Rivkin and Michael Ryan. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Wellek, René. 1963. ‘Literary Theory, Criticism, and History’, in Concepts of
Criticism. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wesling, Donald and Tadeusz Slawek. 1995. Literary Voice: The Calling of Jonah.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Wexman, Virginia Wright, ed. 2003. Film and Authorship. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.362 Bibliography of critical and theoretical works
White, Hayden. 1978. Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
White, Susan. 1991. ‘Allegory and Referentiality: Vertigoand Feminist Criticism’,
Modern Language Notes, vol. 106.
Whiteside, Anna and Michael Issacharoff, eds. 1987. On Referring in Literature.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Williams, Linda Ruth. 1995. Critical Desire: Psychoanalysis and the Literary Subject.
London: Edward Arnold.
Williams, Patrick and Laura Chrisman, eds. 1993. Colonial Discourse and Post-
Colonial Theory: A Reader. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Williams, Raymond. 1969. Modern Tragedy. London: Chatto and Windus.
Williams, Raymond. 1973. The Country and the City. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Williams, Raymond. 1983. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Revised
edn. London: Fontana.
Williams, Raymond. 1992. The Long Revolution. London: Hogarth.
Wilson, Richard and Richard Dutton, eds. 1992. New Historicism and Renaissance
Drama. London: Longman.
Wilson, Scott. 1995. Cultural Materialism: Theory and Practice. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wimsatt Jr, W.K. and Monroe C. Beardsley. 1995. ‘The Intentional Fallacy’, in
Authorship From Plato to the Postmodern: A Reader, ed. Seán Burke. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Winters, Yvor. 1957. ‘The Audible Reading of Poetry’, in The Function of Criticism:
Problems and Exercises, 2ndedn. Denver: Alan Swallow.
Wisker, Gina. 2007. Key Concepts in Postcolonial Literature. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1984. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolfe, Cary, ed. 2003. Zoontologies: The Question of the Animal. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Wolfe, Cary. 2003. Animal Rites: American Culture, the Discourse of Species, and
Posthumanism. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Wolfreys, Julian. 2002. Victorian Hauntings: Spectrality, Gothic, the Uncanny and
Literature.Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Wood, Marcus. 2002. Slavery, Empathy and Pornography. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Wood, Sarah, ed. 1995. Home and Family. Special issue of Angelaki, 2: 1.
Woolf, Virginia. 1942. The Death of the Moth and Other Essays. London: Hogarth
Press.
Woolf, Virginia. 1988. ‘Henry James’s Ghost Stories’, in The Essays of Virginia Woolf,
vol. 3, 1919–1924, ed. Andrew McNeillie. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Wright, Elizabeth. 1998. Psychoanalytic Criticism: A Reappraisal, 2ndedn. Cambridge:
Polity.
Young, Robert. 1981. ‘Introduction’, in Untying the Text: A Post-Structuralist
Reader, ed. Robert Young. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.Bibliography of critical and theoretical works 363
Young, Robert. 1990. White Mythologies: Writing History and the West. London:
Routledge.
Young, Robert. 1991a. ‘Poems That Read Themselves’, Tropismes5: 233–61.
Young, Robert, ed. 1991b. Neocolonialism. Special issue of Oxford Literary Review,
13.
Young, Robert. 1995. Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture and Race.
London: Routledge.
Young, Robert. 1996. Torn Halves: Political Conflict in Literary and Cultural
Theory. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Young, Robert. 1999. ‘Freud’s Secret: The Interpretation of Dreamswas a gothic
novel’, in Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams: New interdisciplinary
essays, ed. Laura Marcus. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Young, Robert. 2000. Postcolonialism: A History. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zipes, Jack. 1988. Fairy Tales and the Art of Subversion: The Classical Genre for
Children and the Process of Civilization. London: Methuen.
oikek, Slavoj. 1991a. Looking Awry: An Introduction to Jacques Lacan through
Popular Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
oikek, Slavoj. 1991b. For They Know Not What They Do: Enjoyment as a Political
Factor. London: Verso.

